Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
LANGUAGE MODELS ARE INJECTIVE
AND HENCE INVERTIBLE
Giorgos Nikolaou1,5,∗Tommaso Mencattini1,2,∗
Donato Crisostomi2
Andrea Santilli2
Yannis Panagakis4,5
Emanuele Rodol`a2,3
1EPFL
2Sapienza University of Rome
3Paradigma
4University of Athens
5Archimedes/Athena RC, Greece
ABSTRACT
Transformer components such as non-linear activations and normalization are in-
herently non-injective, suggesting that different inputs could map to the same out-
put and prevent exact recovery of the input from a model’s representations. In
this paper, we challenge this view. First, we prove mathematically that trans-
former language models mapping discrete input sequences to their corresponding
sequence of continuous representations are injective and therefore lossless, a prop-
erty established at initialization and preserved during training. Second, we confirm
this result empirically through billions of collision tests on six state-of-the-art lan-
guage models, and observe no collisions. Third, we operationalize injectivity: we
introduce SIPIT, the first algorithm that provably and efficiently reconstructs the
exact input text from hidden activations, establishing linear-time guarantees and
demonstrating exact invertibility in practice. Overall, our work establishes injec-
tivity as a fundamental and exploitable property of language models, with direct
implications for transparency, interpretability, and safe deployment.
1
INTRODUCTION
LATENT SPACE
ε
δ
x
x′
z′
z
Rd
δ > 0 =⇒ε > 0
PROMPT SPACE
LLM
SIPIT
Figure 1: The map from prompts to latent
space is injective. SIPIT inverts it.
A core question in understanding large language mod-
els is whether their internal representations faithfully
preserve the information in their inputs. Since Trans-
former architectures rely heavily on non-linearities,
normalization, and many-to-one attention mechanisms,
it is often assumed that they discard information: dif-
ferent inputs could collapse to the same hidden state,
making exact recovery of the input impossible. This
view motivates concerns around transparency, robust-
ness, and safe deployment, as it suggests that the link
between text and representation is inherently lossy.
In this paper, we show that this intuition is misleading. Despite their apparent complexity, standard
decoder-only Transformer language models (seen as maps from prompts to hidden states) are in
fact almost-surely injective; for essentially all parameter settings and during the course of training,
different prompts yield different last-token representations (e.g., see Figure 1).
Building upon this property, we further provide a practical algorithm, SIPIT, that reconstructs the
exact input from hidden activations. To our knowledge, it is the first to guarantee exact recovery in
provable linear time (worst case bound), often faster in practice, turning injectivity from a theoretical
property into an operational tool.
Our approach.
To establish our result, we take a rigorous mathematical view of Transformers
as functions. The key idea is that their components (embeddings, LayerNorm, causal attention,
∗Equal contribution; author order settled via Mario Kart.
Corresponding authors: {georgios.nikolaou,tommaso.mencattini}@epfl.ch
1
arXiv:2510.15511v4  [cs.LG]  13 Mar 2026
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
MLPs, and residual wiring) are smooth and structured enough that the model, as a whole, behaves
predictably with respect to its parameters. Using tools from real analysis, we show that collisions
(two different prompts producing the exact same representation) can only occur on a set of parameter
values that has measure zero; that is, they are mathematical exceptions rather than possibilities one
should expect in practice. Moreover, we prove that common training procedures (gradient descent
with standard step sizes) never move parameters into this exceptional set. In layman’s terms, almost
all models at initialization are injective, and training preserves this property.
Technically, our proofs rely on two ingredients. First, we establish that Transformers are real-
analytic functions of their parameters, which allows us to reason precisely about when and where
collisions could occur. Second, we construct parameter settings where no two prompts collide, and
show that gradient descent (GD) does not collapse such separation, i.e., collisions remain a measure-
zero event. The end result is a finite-horizon guarantee: after any fixed number of training steps, and
under mild assumptions, injectivity holds with probability one. We provide complete formal proofs
of these statements.
Main result.
Our central finding is that causal decoder-only Transformer language models are
injective almost surely. Formally, consider one such model with embedding width d, at least one
attention head per block, real-analytic components, finite vocabulary V, and finite context length K.
Initialize its parameters θ at random, using any distribution that has a density1 (such as Gaussian,
uniform, or Xavier/Glorot), and train for any finite number T of GD steps with step sizes in (0, 1).
Then, with probability one over the random initialization,
s ̸= s′
=⇒
r(s ; θT ) ̸= r(s′ ; θT ) ,
i.e., the map from prompts s to last-token representations r(s ; θT ) is injective across all prompts in
V≤K. In short, collisions in practical settings form a measure-zero set, and neither initialization nor
training will ever place a model inside that set.
Significance.
Our result shows that in standard decoder-only Transformers, different prompts al-
most surely yield different last-token representations across all practically relevant parameter set-
tings and training procedures. The guarantee is both generic (it fails only on a measure-zero set
of pathological parameters) and practical (it holds at finite width, depth, and training time under
common initializations).
Conceptually, we replace a long-assumed property with a rigorous theorem, showing that injectivity
is not an asymptotic idealization but a structural consequence of the architecture itself. Techni-
cally, our analytic framework pinpoints when collisions can arise (through deliberate non-analytic
choices such as quantization or tying), and clarifies that otherwise the model is inherently lossless.
Importantly, it establishes that last-token states almost everywhere identify the input.
Finally, we turn this theoretical guarantee into an operational tool: our algorithm SIPIT uses
gradient-based reconstruction to recover prompts exactly from internal activations, efficiently and
with provable linear-time guarantees. This confirms empirically that collisions do not occur in
practice. Beyond transparency and safety, this elevates invertibility to a first-class property of Trans-
former language models, enabling stronger interpretability, probing, and causal analyses.
2
TRANSFORMERS ARE INJECTIVE
Summary.
In this section we show that decoder-only Transformers almost surely map different
prompts to different hidden states. Collisions can only occur under measure-zero parameter choices,
and gradient-based training never creates them. In simple terms, Transformer representations are
structurally lossless.
Approach.
We consider causal decoder-only Transformer language models with vocabulary V,
finite context window K, and embedding dimension d. For an input sequence s ∈V≤K, let r(s ; θ)
denote the final hidden representation at the last token position2, given parameters θ.
1Put simply, parameters are not drawn from a degenerate or hand-crafted set.
2We focus on the last-token state, since it alone drives next-token prediction; earlier rows matter only insofar
as they shape this final state. Injectivity at the last token is the property of real operational interest.
2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Our analysis relies on three facts:
(i) Real-analyticity. Each component of the architecture (embeddings, positional encodings,
LayerNorm with ε > 0, causal attention, MLPs with analytic activations, residuals) is real-
analytic in its parameters (see Appendix A.2 for the mathematical background).
This
smoothness implies that the set of parameter values causing two distinct prompts to col-
lide is extremely thin (measure zero).
(ii) Initialization.
Standard initialization schemes (Gaussian, uniform, Xavier/Glorot, etc.)
draw parameters from continuous distributions with densities, so they avoid measure-zero
sets with probability one.
(iii) Training. Gradient-based updates (including SGD and mini-batch/full-batch GD) preserve
absolute continuity of the parameter distribution after any finite number of steps; thus,
training cannot generate collisions.
These facts allow us to state and prove injectivity results without relying on asymptotics. We begin
by establishing the analytic structure of the architecture.
Theorem 2.1 (Transformers are real-analytic). Fix embedding dimension d and context length K.
Assume the MLP activation is real-analytic (e.g. tanh, GELU). Then for every input sequence s ∈
V≤K, the map
(s, θ) 7→r(s ; θ) ∈Rd
(1)
is real-analytic jointly in the parameters θ and the input embeddings.
Sketch of proof (full proof in Appendix B, Proposition B.3). Each building block is real-analytic:
polynomials (embeddings, projections), exponential and softmax (attention), reciprocal square root
(LayerNorm with ε > 0), analytic activations in the MLP, and affine maps. Real-analytic functions
are closed under addition, multiplication, quotient, and composition. Since the Transformer is a
finite composition of such blocks, the entire map is real-analytic.
f1
f2
f2 −f1
Figure 2: Two real-analytic functions
f1 and f2 and their difference f1 −
f2. Black contours show the zero sets,
which form thin curves (measure zero)
rather than regions of positive measure.
This smoothness result drives everything that follows:
it ensures that collisions, if they exist, are confined to
measure-zero parameter sets. We now ask: what happens
at initialization?
Theorem 2.2 (Almost-sure injectivity at initialization).
Let θ be drawn from any distribution with a density (e.g.
Gaussian or uniform). Then for any two distinct prompts
s, s′ ∈V≤K,
Pr[r(s ; θ) = r(s′ ; θ)] = 0 .
(2)
Sketch of proof (full proof in Appendix C, Theorem C.2).
Fix s ̸= s′ and consider
h(θ) = ∥r(s ; θ) −r(s′ ; θ)∥2
2 .
(3)
By Theorem 2.1, h is real-analytic. A fundamental di-
chotomy of real-analytic functions states that either h is
identically zero, or its zero set has Lebesgue measure zero (see Figure 2 for an illustration). There-
fore, to rule out the pathological case h ≡0 it suffices to exhibit a single parameter setting where
r(s ; θ) ̸= r(s′ ; θ).
This can always be done: if s and s′ differ at the last position (symbol or length), freeze the network
so that the last state reduces to embedding plus position, and choose distinct rows; this already
separates r(s) and r(s′). If instead they differ earlier, let i⋆be the first mismatch and set one attention
head so the last position attends almost entirely to i⋆, encoding its token in the value; this forces
different outputs for s and s′.
Hence h is not identically zero, and so the collision set {θ : h(θ) = 0} has Lebesgue measure
zero. Since standard initializations have densities, the probability of sampling such θ is zero, and
r(s ; θ) ̸= r(s′ ; θ) (injectivity) holds almost surely at initialization.
3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
According to Theorem 2.2, at initialization, collisions are mathematically impossible except on a
vanishingly small set of parameter values. Finally, with the following Theorem we ensure training
does not break injectivity.
Theorem 2.3 (Injectivity preserved under training). Let θ0 be initialized from a distribution with a
density, and let θT be the parameters after T steps of gradient descent with step sizes in (0, 1). Then
with probability one,
s ̸= s′
=⇒
r(s ; θT ) ̸= r(s′ ; θT ) ,
(4)
Sketch of proof (full proof in Theorems C.1 and C.5). At initialization, θ0 is drawn from a distribu-
tion with a density, hence absolutely continuous. To break injectivity during training, GD would
need to map this continuous law onto the measure-zero collision set identified in Theorem 2.2. We
show this cannot happen.
A single GD step is the map ϕ(θ) = θ−η∇L(θ), where L is the training loss. Because the network
and the softmax cross-entropy loss are real-analytic, ϕ is also real-analytic. Its Jacobian determinant
det Dϕ(θ) is itself real-analytic and not identically zero (one can check this by evaluating at a
simple parameter setting). Hence the set where det Dϕ = 0 has measure zero. Away from that set,
the Inverse Function Theorem applies: ϕ is a smooth, locally invertible change of coordinates that
can stretch or bend space but cannot collapse regions of positive volume onto lower-dimensional
sets. Therefore, pushing forward an absolutely continuous distribution through ϕ yields another
absolutely continuous distribution.
Since this argument holds for each step, any finite sequence of GD updates preserves absolute con-
tinuity of the parameter law. Combining with Theorem 2.2, which shows that collision sets are
measure-zero, we conclude that r(s ; θT ) ̸= r(s′ ; θT ) almost surely for all s ̸= s′.
Thus injectivity is not just an initialization property but remains true throughout training. A simple
but important corollary follows.
Corollary 2.3.1 (SGD and mini-batch GD). Under the assumptions of Theorem 2.3, the same con-
clusion holds when the updates are θt+1 = θt −ηt ∇θLBt(θt) with arbitrary (possibly random or
adversarial) batch selections Bt, thus including the singleton case of SGD and the full dataset.
Proof. The proof argument of Theorem 2.3 is unchanged: for each fixed batch B, the update map
ϕB(θ) = θ −η∇LB(θ) is real-analytic with a Jacobian that is not identically zero. Indeed, the
batch loss is the average LB =
1
|B|
P|B|
i=1 Li, so at the point θ⋆from the single-sample proof (where
the Jacobian determinant is sample-independent and nonzero) the batch Jacobian coincides with the
single-sample one by linearity of differentiation, and its determinant is therefore also nonzero. Thus,
the finite composition of such maps preserves absolute continuity of the parameter law.
Together with this robustness to different training regimes, we can also strengthen the guarantee
itself: injectivity holds not just pairwise, but globally across finite sets of prompts.
Corollary 2.3.2 (Distinctness for finite sets). For any finite set of prompts S ⊆V≤K, the represen-
tations {r(s ; θT ) : s ∈S} are almost surely all distinct.
Proof. See Appendix C, Corollary C.2.1.
These results show that decoder-only Transformer language models are structurally injective: dif-
ferent prompts almost surely yield different last-token states.
Collisions can be manufactured,
e.g., through deliberate non-analytic choices (quantization, non-smooth activations), but in practical
training pipelines, injectivity is guaranteed; extensive experiments in §4.1 confirm this empirically.
Failure cases.
We showed that non-injective transformers are overwhelmingly unlikely, though it
is still possible for an adversary to construct collisions by hand. For instance, if two vocabulary
items vi ̸= vj are assigned exactly the same embedding vector, then any prompts differing only by
swapping vi and vj yield identical representations. Likewise, if two absolute positional embeddings
are made exactly equal and the remaining weights are tuned to suppress other positional signals,
4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Gemma-3/1B
Gemma-3/4B
Gemma-3/12B
GPT-2/S
GPT-2/M
GPT-2/L
10−5
10−3
10−1
101
103
L2 Distance (min)
Collision threshold
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Layer
10−5
10−3
10−1
101
103
L2 Distance
Collision threshold
Figure 3: Seeking collisions in a large-scale prompt set: The minimum distances between last-token
states are far above the collision threshold 10−6: (left) across layers for GPT-2 and Gemma-3
families (one dot per layer), (right) across depth for GPT-2 Small; distances grow with depth.
one can force collisions between sequences that differ only at those positions. These scenarios,
however, require deliberately engineered parameter choices: under continuous random initialization
and standard training, the probability of such coincidences is zero.
3
EXACT PROMPT RECOVERY VIA SIPIT
In the previous section, we have proven that decoder-only Transformers are almost surely injective,
i.e., different prompts map to different hidden states. We now show how this property can be used
in practice to reconstruct the exact input prompt given hidden states at some layer. We call this
algorithm SIPIT (Sequential Inverse Prompt via ITerative updates).3
Threat model.
This paper focuses on the injectivity result and its algorithmic consequence; we do
not define a full adversarial model. A natural setting where SIPIT applies is one in which an adver-
sary obtains the hidden-state sequence—for instance, through a leaked KV-cache, a shared-inference
pipeline, or an API that exposes intermediate representations. Our injectivity result guarantees that
exact recovery from only the final embedding is possible in principle, but designing an efficient algo-
rithm for that setting is nontrivial and left to future work; here we assume access to all per-position
states at a given layer ℓ.
Recall from §2 that the mapping from a prompt s to its last-token state is almost surely injective.
Since the last state is itself a deterministic function of the hidden matrix at any layer ℓ, injectivity
extends to the full representation
s 7→H(ℓ)(s) ∈RT ×d .
(5)
We denote by ht(s) the row of H(ℓ)(s) at position t. In the following, the parameters θ and target
layer ℓare considered fixed and omitted for simplicity.
The algorithm exploits the causal structure of Transformers: the hidden state at position t depends
only on the prefix ⟨s1, . . . , st−1⟩and the current token st. This means that if we already know the
prefix, then the hidden state at position t uniquely identifies st.
Example. Suppose the vocabulary is a, b, c and the true prompt is ⟨a, b⟩. At t = 1, the hidden state
depends only on s1. By comparing the observed state with the three candidate states produced by
trying a, b, and c, we can tell exactly which one matches, thus recovering s1 = a. Then at t = 2, we
know the prefix ⟨a⟩, so we try appending each candidate token and again match the resulting hidden
state to recover s2 = b. Iterating this procedure reconstructs the full sequence.
More generally, we can look at the “one-step” map
vj 7→ht(π ⊕vj) ,
vj ∈V ,
(6)
which gives the hidden state at step t for each possible next token, given the fixed prefix π =
⟨s1, . . . , st−1⟩(here ⊕denotes concatenation).
3Implementation available at https://github.com/giorgosnikolaou/SIPIT.
5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Remark. By the analytic arguments of §2, the one-step map is almost surely injective: with a fixed
prefix, any two distinct tokens almost surely yield distinct hidden states.
This property makes sequence recovery straightforward. At each step t, given the hidden state bht and
the already recovered prefix, we simply check which candidate token produces a matching hidden
state. That token must be the true st. Repeating this process recovers the entire sequence.
This leads to the SIPIT algorithm, shown in Algorithm 1. At every position, the algorithm cycles
through vocabulary candidates (according to some policy such as random order or gradient-guided
search) until it finds the unique match4, then appends it to the reconstructed prefix and moves on.
Algorithm 1 SIPIT: Sequential Inverse Prompt via ITerative updates
Require: Observed layer-ℓstates bH(ℓ) ∈RT ×d; vocabulary V; tolerance ε ≥0.
Ensure: Recovered sequence bs = ⟨ˆs1, . . . ,ˆsT ⟩.
1: bs ←⟨⟩
2: for t = 1 to T do
3:
C ←∅
▷tested candidates
4:
for j = 1 to |V| do
5:
vj ←POLICY (V, C,bs, ℓ)
▷new candidate token vj (see Alg. 2 and 3)
6:
if bht ∈Aπ,t(vj ; ε) then
▷verify vj (see Def. D.2)
7:
bs ←bs ⊕vj
▷hit!
8:
break
9:
else
10:
C ←C ∪{vj}
11:
end if
12:
end for
13: end for
14: return bs
To rule out edge cases and analyze the computational cost of SIPIT, we now state a formal guarantee.
Theorem 3.1 (Correctness of SIPIT). Under the assumptions of Theorem 2.3, given observed hidden
states bH(ℓ), SIPIT recovers the true input sequence s with probability one in at most T|V| steps.
Sketch of proof (full proof in Appendix D, Thm. D.2, Prop. D.4). At each step, local injectivity en-
sures a unique token matches the observed state. As the policy spans the vocabulary, this token will
be found in at most |V| trials. Induction over t = 1, . . . , T completes the argument.
Theorem 3.2 (Robustness of SIPIT). Under the assumptions of Theorem 2.3, fix a layer ℓand define,
for any prefix π and time t,
∆π,t :=
min
v̸=v′∈V
ht(π ⊕v) −ht(π ⊕v′)

2.
Let s = ⟨s1, . . . , sT ⟩, define the prefixes πt = ⟨s1, . . . , st−1⟩and suppose access to the perturbed
hidden states
bht(πt ⊕st) = ht(πt ⊕st) + et,
∥et∥2 < ∆πt,t
2
,
t ∈[T].
Then SIPIT recovers the true sequence s with probability one, and terminates in at most T|V| steps.
Proof in Appendix D, Thm. D.2, Prop. D.2.
In short, SIPIT turns the almost-sure injectivity of Transformer representations into a constructive
procedure: not only are hidden states unique identifiers of prompts, but the exact input sequence
can be efficiently recovered in linear time, and often faster in practice. It is a structural property of
Transformer representations, not a quirk of initialization or training.
4In practice, we accept matches if the observed hidden state is within an ε-ball around the predicted one.
6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Sample Index
10−7
10−1
102
L2 Distance
Collision threshold
GPT-2 Small
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Sample Index
10−7
10−1
104
L2 Distance
Collision threshold
Gemma3-1B
Figure 4: Exhaustive collision search on the 10 closest prefix prompts. The boxplots look flat and
uneventful, and that is the point: even under stress-test conditions with billions of candidate pairs,
all minima stay well above the collision threshold, showing that nothing collapses.
4
EXPERIMENTS
We previously proved that decoder-only Transformers are injective (§2) and introduced an algorithm,
SIPIT, that leverages this property to recover the exact input prompt from hidden states at a given
layer (§3). We now provide extensive empirical evidence supporting our theory by showing that
distinct prompts yield distinct embeddings, i.e., no collisions occur by a large margin (§4.1). We
then demonstrate that SIPIT successfully reconstructs the original input prompt (§4.2).
Environment.
All experiments were run on a single NVIDIA A100-SXM (64 GB) GPU.
Python 3.11, CUDA 12.2, PyTorch 2.8.0, and transformers 4.50.0 were used for all experi-
ments. Reported runtimes refer to this setup.
4.1
SEARCHING FOR COLLISIONS
Model
ℓ2 Distance (min)
layer 1
layer L
2
layer L
Llama-3.1-8B
0.001
0.129
0.620
Mistral-7B-v0.1
0.002
0.187
1.274
Phi-4-mini-ins
0.014
1.336
9.020
TinyStories-33M
0.029
1.434
2.793
Table 1:
Minimum pairwise distance be-
tween last-token states in the first, middle,
and final layers of four models. All values
are well above the collision threshold 10−6.
We collected 100k prompts by uniformly sampling
from a mixture of four datasets: wikipedia-en5,
C4 (Raffel et al., 2020), The Pile (Gao et al.,
2020), and python-github-code6.
For each
prompt, we extracted the last-token representation
and systematically checked whether any two distinct
prompts produced identical embeddings. This pro-
cess required around 5 billion pairwise comparisons.
We observed no collisions across all models and lay-
ers: distinct prompts always yielded distinct last-
token states. Figure 3 (left) shows the per-layer minimum distances for the Gemma3 pretrained
(Team et al., 2025) and GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) families, with strictly positive values through-
out. Table 1 complements this by reporting the same statistic for Llama-3.1-8B (Grattafiori et al.,
2024), Mistral-7B-v0.1 (Jiang et al., 2023), Phi-4-mini-instruct (Microsoft et al.,
2025) and TinyStories-33M (Eldan & Li, 2023), again showing clear separation at the first,
middle, and last layers. Finally, Figure 3 (right) zooms in on GPT-2 Small, revealing that these
distances typically increase with depth. Additional results for GPT-2 Medium, GPT-2 Large
and Gemma3 (1B, 4B, 12B) appear in Appendix E, confirming the same trend.
Model
ℓ2 Distance (min)
FP4
INT8
FP32
Llama-3.1-8B
2.281
6.597
1.274
Mistral-7B-v0.1
1.748
2.692
1.136
Phi-4-mini-instruct
18.368
20.956
8.780
Table 2: Quantized Models: Minimum pair-
wise distance between last-token states in the
final layer of three quantized models.
Model
Size
ℓ2 Distance (min)
layer 1
layer L/2
layer L
phi-4
14B
0.010
1.025
8.759
Llama-3.1-70B
70B
0.005
0.465
3.975
Table 3: Large Models: Minimum pairwise
distance between last-token states in the first,
middle, and final layers of two large models.
5https://huggingface.co/datasets/wikimedia/wikipedia
6https://huggingface.co/datasets/angie-chen55/python-github-code
7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
100
200
300
400
500
Sequence length
10−5
10−3
10−1
101
103
L2 Distance
Collision threshold
mean
min
max
Figure 5: Sequence length vs. pairwise
distance for GPT-2. Min, mean, and max
distances rise at short lengths and then sta-
bilize, indicating consistent separability.
Figure 5 shows how pairwise distances between last-
token states vary with prompt length in GPT-2
Small. Three patterns emerge: (i) the minimum dis-
tance is never close to zero at all lengths, and (ii) it
grows rapidly at short lengths but then levels off, sug-
gesting that beyond a moderate context size, adding to-
kens does not affect separability; (iii) the overall spread
(min-max) stays bounded, with no sign of pathologi-
cal collapses. Similar behavior is seen in Gemma3 (see
Appendix E, Figure 9). Overall, clear margins emerge
quickly and then stabilize, making collisions unlikely at
any sequence length.
Exhaustive collision test. Different from previous ex-
periments, in this setting (Figure 4), we restrict our
analysis to the 10 prompts from the dataset mixture whose embeddings have the smallest last-
token distances.
For each of these prompts, we appended every vocabulary token and com-
puted all pairwise distances between the resulting last-token states, effectively performing an ex-
haustive search over continuations and yielding more than 343 billion prompt pairs per model.
This exhaustive experiment helps rule out the possibility that earlier observations were simply due
to chance in random sampling rather than a true absence of collisions. While a complete search over
all possible prompts would be ideal, it is computationally infeasible. The number of unique prompts
grows exponentially with sequence length, and the number of pairwise comparisons grows even
faster. For context, even with single-token prompts and the vocabulary size of Gemma3-1B, there
are already over 34 billion possible prompt pairs, making exhaustive evaluation entirely impractical.
Our compromise still revealed structure: we identified 5 prompt pairs with highly similar last-token
embeddings, suggesting overlapping semantic content and motivating us to ask whether distinct next
tokens could preserve meaning, i.e., yield essentially identical last-token hidden states.
0
50
100
150
Inversion time (s)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Figure 6: Inversion time as a
function of depth. Runtimes
rise only mildly across layers.
Figure 4 reports the resulting distributions as boxplots for both
GPT-2 Small and Gemma3-1B, with distances far from zero (no
collision), confirming local injectivity as predicted by our theory.
FP4 and INT8 weight quantization.
To assess how weight quan-
tization affects pairwise representation distances, we conducted
additional experiments with FP4 and INT8 quantization on sev-
eral models (Llama-3.1-8B, Phi-4-mini-instruct, and
Mistral-7B-v0.1). We further extended this analysis to FP4-
quantized 14B and 70B parameter models, namely Phi-4 (14B)
and Llama-3.1-70B. As shown in Tables 2 and 3, across all
tested models quantization (1) does not introduce any collisions, (2)
more than doubles the minimum distance between representations,
thereby preserving the integrity of the representation space, and (3)
maintains this separation even as model size increases substantially.
4.2
INVERTIBILITY RESULTS
We now test whether the theoretical injectivity translates into exact recovery on pre-trained models.
Using SIPIT with only the hidden states at a fixed layer, we attempt to reconstruct the full prompt
token-by-token for GPT-2 Small. We sample 100 prompts, with a 90%-10% split between mean-
ingful sentences and random token sequences (to test robustness in unstructured cases), and attempt
to reconstruct them from hidden states. We compare against HARDPROMPTS (Wen et al., 2023),
which leverages gradient signals for approximate prompt discovery, and against a SIPIT ablation that
replaces the gradient-guided candidate policy with the uniformly random policy (BRUTEFORCE).
Other inversion approaches (Morris et al., 2023a;b; Nazir et al., 2025) tackle a different setting
altogether: they operate in black box access, using sequences of next-token logprobs or encoder
logits rather than hidden states, and train auxiliary inverters to reconstruct text, at high computational
cost. Their outputs are typically approximate and not guaranteed exact. These differences make
8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Model
Vocab size
Inversion Performance
Accuracy
Time (s)
Vocab explored (%)
Mistral-7B-v0.1
32000
100%
111.78 ± 46.50
0.19 ± 0.08 %
Llama-3.1-8B
128255
100%
549.48 ± 265.75
0.21 ± 0.10 %
Table 4: Inversion performance on FP4-quantized models with different vocabulary sizes. SIPIT re-
covers all tokens with 100% accuracy while exploring less than 0.22% of the vocabulary on average.
them complementary but not directly comparable to our setting of training-free, exact inversion
from hidden states in decoder-only LMs.
Method
Mean Time (s)
Accuracy
HARDPROMPTS
6132.59 ± 104.61
0.00
BRUTEFORCE (ours)
3889.61 ± 691.17
1.00
SIPIT (ours)
28.01 ± 35.87
1.00
Table 5: SIPIT ensures efficient exact re-
covery, unlike HARDPROMPTS (no recov-
ery) or BRUTEFORCE (infeasible runtime).
Results are reported in Table 5. Across all prompts
(20 tokens each), SIPIT recovers the exact sequence
with 100% token-level accuracy (no errors, no colli-
sions), matching the theoretical guarantee of linear-
time convergence. In contrast, HARDPROMPTS com-
pletely fails to recover the input, while BRUTEFORCE
eventually succeeds but at a prohibitive computational
cost, requiring several orders of magnitude longer.
Robustness and vocabulary scaling.
The theoretical analysis in Theorem 3.2 shows that our in-
version algorithm is robust to a certain level of noise while maintaining linear scaling in vocabulary
size. To empirically validate this, we use FP4-quantized versions of Mistral-7B-v0.1 (≈32K
vocabulary size) and Llama-3.1-8B (≈128K). We sample 50 prompts (10 tokens each) and
attempt to reconstruct them from hidden states corrupted by FP4 weight quantization. As shown in
Table 4, SIPIT reconstructs all inputs with perfect accuracy while exploring, on average, less than
0.22% of the vocabulary, demonstrating that the gradient-based heuristic is both robust to quanti-
zation noise and highly efficient. From a complexity perspective, the nearly constant percentage of
tokens explored across the two vocabulary scales empirically confirms the predicted linear scaling.
Effect of layer depth.
Finally, Figure 6 shows inversion times by layer for longer prompts (ranging
from 20 to 200 tokens). Although deeper layers are costlier in principle (since verifying a candidate
and computing gradients require traversing more blocks), the effect is minor: runtimes rise only
slightly from first to last layer, and the scaling remains graceful overall. Likely, earlier layers need
more iterations to converge, while deep layers store richer information that reduces the search effort.
As a result, the net cost remains stable, confirming SIPIT is efficient across depth.
5
RELATED WORK
Our results connect to two active lines of research: theoretical analyses of Transformer architectures,
and inverse problems in language modeling. We briefly review both to position our contributions.
Analytical properties of Transformers.
Viewed as functions on Rd, individual Transformer
components are clearly non-injective:
LayerNorm collapses along per-example statistics (Ba
et al., 2016), residual connections can cancel, and in attention-only stacks, rank decays doubly-
exponentially with depth (Dong et al., 2021). Likewise, on the output side, the softmax bottleneck
constrains the distributions reachable by language models (Yang et al., 2018). From this algebraic
perspective, Transformers seem inherently many-to-one, an intuition echoed by classical complete-
ness and universal-approximation theorems for Transformers, which show that highly many-to-one
maps can be represented in principle; we briefly review these results in Appendix F.
Our focus is different: we study the discrete-to-continuous map from prompts s ∈V≤K to hidden
states in Rd. In this setting, analytic viewpoints on Transformer computation become powerful:
treating each layer as a real-analytic map yields almost-sure guarantees that hold at finite width,
depth, and training horizon (Appendix F surveys which modern LLMs satisfy this assumption and
proves the analyticity for all activation functions encountered in practice). Recent work has adopted
this angle for related properties: Jiang & Haghtalab (2025) show that building blocks of modern
architectures are almost always surjective, while Sutter et al. (2025) prove that Transformers at
random initialization are almost surely injective with respect to the entire hidden-state matrix (and
only at initialization). Differently, we prove injectivity with respect to the parameters and at the
task-relevant last-token state; crucially, we show that injectivity is not an initialization artifact but
persists under training.
9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Inverse problems in language modeling.
Model inversion asks whether one can reconstruct a
model’s input prompt from outputs or internal signals (Sun et al., 2021). In the context of lan-
guage models, this question has motivated a growing body of work exploring practical inversion
strategies. Output-to-prompt methods infer prompts from generated continuations but yield only
approximate reconstructions (Zhang et al., 2024). Recent work shows that even black-box outputs
are information-rich: Morris et al. (2023b) train a separate inverter to map next-token probability
vectors to text, and Nazir et al. (2025) extend this by taking sequences of logprobs, applying a lin-
ear compression to embedding dimension, and training an encoder-decoder inverter; this achieves
higher exact-match rates but still without guarantees. Complementarily, Morris et al. (2023a) recon-
struct text from encoder logits via a trained iterative inverter. These contributions highlight privacy
risks when probabilities or embeddings are exposed, but they differ from our setting: they rely on
trained inverters, remain approximate, and do not invert hidden states of decoder-only LMs.
A related line of work frames the task as automated prompt optimization, casting prompt design as
discrete sequence optimization aligned with downstream performance (Guo et al., 2025; Sun et al.,
2022; Deng et al., 2022); methods such as AutoPrompt (Shin et al., 2020) and Hard Prompts Made
Easy (Wen et al., 2023) use gradient signals to discover effective, but approximate, prompts. Most
closely related to ours, Thomas et al. (2025) recover prompts from hidden states via a sequential
algorithm that uses an LLM-based policy to rank candidates; lacking injectivity guarantees, however,
it must score all vocabulary tokens before committing, with no formal exactness guarantees.
Unlike all prior work, our approach is training-free, efficient, and comes with provable linear-time
guarantees for exact recovery from internal states.
6
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
This work establishes that decoder-only Transformers are almost surely injective: distinct prompts
produce distinct hidden states under standard initialization and training. Building on this structural
result, we introduced SIPIT, the first algorithm that can recover the exact input sequence from hidden
activations, with provable linear-time guarantees. Together, these contributions move injectivity
from an informal belief to a rigorously grounded and operational property of language models.
The scientific impact is clear. Our findings reconcile two competing views in the community: Trans-
formers as “lossy” due to nonlinearities, normalization, and many-to-one attention, versus language
models as injective in their hidden representations. We advocate viewing language models as maps
on the sequence space rather than the embedding space; under this perspective, we prove that all
information about the input sequence is almost surely preserved end-to-end. The constructive in-
version offered by SIPIT strengthens this point in practice, establishing a clean baseline for inter-
pretability and auditing: if probes or inversion methods fail, it is not because the information is
missing. For mechanistic interpretability in particular, injectivity guarantees that last-token states
faithfully encode the full input, giving a sound foundation for causal and probing analyses.
Beyond theory, the findings carry practical and legal implications. Hidden states are not abstractions
but the prompt in disguise: any system that stores or transmits them is effectively handling user
text itself, with direct consequences for privacy, deletion, and compliance (Miranda et al., 2025).
The evolving regulatory landscape has not yet fully reckoned with this fact. The Hamburg Data
Protection Commissioner, for instance, argued that LLM parameters do not constitute personal data
because training data is transformed into abstract mathematical representations during learning, and
that it “remains doubtful whether any extractable data records constitute personal data” (HmbBfDI,
2024). That analysis, however, concerns training data encoded in model weights; it does not address
the hidden representations computed at inference time. Our results reveal that these representations
are lossless encodings of the user’s exact input, recoverable in full via SIPIT. Consequently, any
system that stores, caches, or transmits hidden states is effectively handling the user’s verbatim text,
and the corresponding pipelines should be subject to the same data-protection obligations as the raw
prompts they encode.
Finally, this work opens several directions. Extending the analysis to multimodal architectures such
as music and vision Transformers is an open problem. Studying approximate inversion under noise
or quantization will clarify how robust invertibility remains in practice. Bridging these technical
insights with evolving regulatory frameworks will be crucial for safe and responsible deployment.
10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
The experimental setup (hardware, software versions, and dataset construction) is described in §4;
the 100k-prompt benchmark uses uniform sampling from four public datasets detailed in §4.1. On
the theory side, every theorem stated in the main text is accompanied by a complete proof in the
appendix: analytic preliminaries in Appendix A, the formal definition of the Transformer language
model and the proof that it is real-analytic in Appendix B, almost-sure injectivity and its preservation
under training in Appendix C, and SIPIT correctness and robustness in Appendix D. Appendix E
provides Implementation Details and Additional Experiments, and Appendix F verifies that all acti-
vation functions used in all modern LLMs satisfy the analyticity assumption.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Figure 1 is adapted from Autoencoder Diagrams by Keenan Crane (2025), used under CC0 1.0
Universal. We further acknowledge Adam Barla for the initial discussions on LLMs invertibility.
This work has been supported by project MIS 5154714 of the National Recovery and Resilience Plan
Greece 2.0 funded by the European Union under the NextGenerationEU Program, the MUR FIS2
grant n. FIS-2023-00942 “NEXUS” (cup B53C25001030001), and partly by Sapienza University
of Rome via the Seed of ERC grant “MINT.AI” (cup B83C25001040001).
REFERENCES
W. E. Aitken. General topology. part 4: Metric spaces, 2020. URL https://public.csusm.
edu/aitken_html/Essays/Topology/metric_spaces.pdf. 26
Shane Arora, Hazel Browne, and Daniel Daners. An alternative approach to fr´echet derivatives.
Journal of the Australian Mathematical Society, 111(2):202–220, 2021. 25
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.06450, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1607.06450. 9
Jos´e E Chac´on and Tarn Duong. Higher order differential analysis with vectorized derivatives. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2011.01833, 2020. 20
Mingkai Deng, Jianyu Wang, Cheng-Ping Hsieh, Yihan Wang, Han Guo, Tianmin Shu, Meng Song,
Eric P. Xing, and Zhiting Hu. Rlprompt: Optimizing discrete text prompts with reinforcement
learning, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.12548. 10
Yihe Dong, Jean-Baptiste Cordonnier, and Andreas Loukas. Attention is not all you need: Pure
attention loses rank doubly exponentially with depth. In Proceedings of the 38th International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
search, 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/dong21a.html. 9
Ronen Eldan and Yuanzhi Li.
Tinystories: How small can language models be and still speak
coherent english?, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.07759. 7
Gerald B Folland. Real analysis. Pure and Applied Mathematics: A Wiley Series of Texts, Mono-
graphs and Tracts. John Wiley & Sons, Nashville, TN, 2 edition, March 1999. 26, 41
Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason
Phang, Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, Shawn Presser, and Connor Leahy. The pile:
An 800gb dataset of diverse text for language modeling, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2101.00027. 7
Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad
Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan,
Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Ko-
renev, Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava
Spataru, Baptiste Roziere, Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux,
Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret,
11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius,
Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits, Danny Wyatt, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary,
Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab
AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip Radenovic, Francisco
Guzm´an, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Govind That-
tai, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Kore-
vaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan Misra,
Ivan Evtimov, Jack Zhang, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Ma-
hadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu,
Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jong-
soo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala,
Karthik Prasad, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid
El-Arini, Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Kushal Lakhotia, Lauren
Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin,
Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo, Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi,
Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Mathew
Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Ku-
mar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal, Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoy-
chev, Niladri Chatterji, Ning Zhang, Olivier Duchenne, Onur C¸ elebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan
Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan,
Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong, Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ra-
mon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic, Roberta Raileanu, Rohan Maheswari, Ro-
hit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross Taylor, Ruan
Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa, Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell,
Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang, Sharath Raparthy, Sheng
Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer
Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Herman,
Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom, Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mi-
haylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor
Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, V´ıtor Albiero, Vladan Petrovic, Weiwei
Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xiaofang
Wang, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xide Xia, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Gold-
schlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning
Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh,
Aayushi Srivastava, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria,
Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein,
Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Amos Teo, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, An-
drew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, An-
nie Dong, Annie Franco, Anuj Goyal, Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel,
Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leon-
hardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu
Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Brandon Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Mon-
talvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina Mejia, Ce Liu, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao
Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai, Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Cynthia
Gao, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide
Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le,
Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily
Hahn, Emily Wood, Eric-Tuan Le, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smoth-
ers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Filippos Kokkinos, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni,
Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia
Swee, Gil Halpern, Grant Herman, Grigory Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan,
Hakan Inan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang, Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harri-
son Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Goldman, Hongyuan Zhan, Ibrahim Damlaj,
Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Ilias Leontiadis, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman, James
Geboski, James Kohli, Janice Lam, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jen-
nifer Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang,
Joe Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Jun-
jie Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun Zand, Kathy
Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kiran Jagadeesh, Kun Huang,
12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Kunal Chawla, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva, Lee Bell,
Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian Khabsa,
Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson, Matthew Lennie, Matthias
Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally, Miao Liu, Michael L.
Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike
Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mohammad Rastegari,
Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navyata Bawa, Nayan
Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikhil Mehta, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong,
Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli, Parkin Kent,
Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux, Piotr Dollar,
Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao, Rachel Ro-
driguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Rangaprabhu Parthasarathy,
Raymond Li, Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sachin
Mehta, Sachin Siby, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon,
Sasha Sidorov, Satadru Pan, Saurabh Mahajan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ra-
maswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lindsay, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha,
Shishir Patil, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal,
Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satter-
field, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Summer Deng, Sungmin Cho, Sunny Virk, Suraj
Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser, Tamara Best, Thilo
Koehler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Timothy Chou, Tzook
Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish Ku-
mar, Vishal Mangla, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov,
Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Constable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiao-
jian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yaniv Kleinman, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia,
Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi, Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yu Zhao,
Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yunlu Li, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef Rosnbrick, Zhao-
duo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, Zhiwei Zhao, and Zhiyu Ma. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783. 7
Qingyan Guo, Rui Wang, Junliang Guo, Bei Li, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Guoqing Liu, Jiang Bian, and
Yujiu Yang. Evoprompt: Connecting llms with evolutionary algorithms yields powerful prompt
optimizers, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.08532. 10
Harold V Henderson and Shayle R Searle. The vec-permutation matrix, the vec operator and kro-
necker products: A review. Linear and multilinear algebra, 9(4):271–288, 1981. 20, 38
HmbBfDI.
Discussion paper:
Large language models and personal data, 2024.
URL
https://datenschutz-hamburg.de/fileadmin/user_upload/HmbBfDI/
Datenschutz/Informationen/240715_Discussion_Paper_Hamburg_DPA_
KI_Models.pdf. 10
Roger A. Horn and Charles R. Johnson. Matrix Analysis. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
2 edition, 2013. 37
Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chap-
lot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier,
L´elio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril,
Thomas Wang, Timoth´ee Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7b, 2023. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2310.06825. 7
Haozhe Jiang and Nika Haghtalab. On surjectivity of neural networks: Can you elicit any behavior
from your model?
arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.19445, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2508.19445. 9
Tamara G. Kolda and Brett W. Bader. Tensor decompositions and applications. SIAM Review,
51(3):455–500, 2009.
doi: 10.1137/07070111X.
URL https://doi.org/10.1137/
07070111X. 18
Steven G Krantz and Harold R Parks. A primer of real analytic functions. Springer Science &
Business Media, 2002. 23
13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Andrew D. Lewis. Chapter 1: Holomorphic and real analytic calculus. Notes on Global Analysis,
Vol. 1, Queen’s University, February 2014. URL https://mast.queensu.ca/˜andrew/
teaching/math942/pdf/1chapter1.pdf. Version: 2014-02-28. 19, 40
David G. Luenberger. Optimization by vector space methods. Wiley-Interscience, 1997. 25
Jan R. Magnus and Heinz Neudecker. Matrix differential calculus with applications in statistics and
Econometrics. John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 2019. 25, 36
Microsoft, :, Abdelrahman Abouelenin, Atabak Ashfaq, Adam Atkinson, Hany Awadalla, Nguyen
Bach, Jianmin Bao, Alon Benhaim, Martin Cai, Vishrav Chaudhary, Congcong Chen, Dong Chen,
Dongdong Chen, Junkun Chen, Weizhu Chen, Yen-Chun Chen, Yi ling Chen, Qi Dai, Xiyang Dai,
Ruchao Fan, Mei Gao, Min Gao, Amit Garg, Abhishek Goswami, Junheng Hao, Amr Hendy,
Yuxuan Hu, Xin Jin, Mahmoud Khademi, Dongwoo Kim, Young Jin Kim, Gina Lee, Jinyu Li,
Yunsheng Li, Chen Liang, Xihui Lin, Zeqi Lin, Mengchen Liu, Yang Liu, Gilsinia Lopez, Chong
Luo, Piyush Madan, Vadim Mazalov, Arindam Mitra, Ali Mousavi, Anh Nguyen, Jing Pan, Daniel
Perez-Becker, Jacob Platin, Thomas Portet, Kai Qiu, Bo Ren, Liliang Ren, Sambuddha Roy,
Ning Shang, Yelong Shen, Saksham Singhal, Subhojit Som, Xia Song, Tetyana Sych, Praneetha
Vaddamanu, Shuohang Wang, Yiming Wang, Zhenghao Wang, Haibin Wu, Haoran Xu, Weijian
Xu, Yifan Yang, Ziyi Yang, Donghan Yu, Ishmam Zabir, Jianwen Zhang, Li Lyna Zhang, Yunan
Zhang, and Xiren Zhou. Phi-4-mini technical report: Compact yet powerful multimodal language
models via mixture-of-loras, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.01743. 7
Michele Miranda, Elena Sofia Ruzzetti, Andrea Santilli, Fabio Massimo Zanzotto, S´ebastien
Brati`eres, and Emanuele Rodol`a. Preserving privacy in large language models: A survey on cur-
rent threats and solutions. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2025. ISSN 2835-8856.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Ss9MTTN7OL. 10
Boris Mityagin. The zero set of a real analytic function. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.07276, 2015.
19, 20
John X. Morris, Volodymyr Kuleshov, Vitaly Shmatikov, and Alexander M. Rush. Text embeddings
reveal (almost) as much as text, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06816. 8,
10
John X. Morris, Wenting Zhao, Justin T. Chiu, Vitaly Shmatikov, and Alexander M. Rush. Language
model inversion, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.13647. 8, 10
James R. Munkres. Topology. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2 edition, 2000. 25, 26
Murtaza Nazir, Matthew Finlayson, John X. Morris, Xiang Ren, and Swabha Swayamdipta. Bet-
ter language model inversion by compactly representing next-token distributions, 2025. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.17090. 8, 10
Jorge P´erez, Javier Marinkovi´c, and Pablo Barcel´o. On the turing completeness of modern neural
network architectures. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=HyGBdo0qFm. 58
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever.
Language models are unsupervised multitask learners.
2019.
URL https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:160025533. 7, 51
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-
text transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(140):1–67, 2020. URL http:
//jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html. 7
Anton Razzhigaev, Matvey Mikhalchuk, Elizaveta Goncharova, Ivan Oseledets, Denis Dimitrov, and
Andrey Kuznetsov. The shape of learning: Anisotropy and intrinsic dimensions in transformer-
based models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.05928. 54
14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Anton Razzhigaev, Matvey Mikhalchuk, Temurbek Rahmatullaev, Elizaveta Goncharova, Polina
Druzhinina, Ivan Oseledets, and Andrey Kuznetsov. Llm-microscope: Uncovering the hidden
role of punctuation in context memory of transformers, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2502.15007. 54
Walter Rudin. Principles of Mathematical Analysis. McGraw–Hill, New York, 3 edition, 1976. 26,
41, 57
Taylor Shin, Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L. Logan IV, Eric Wallace, and Sameer Singh. Autoprompt:
Eliciting knowledge from language models with automatically generated prompts, 2020. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.15980. 10
Ravid Shwartz-Ziv and Naftali Tishby. Opening the black box of deep neural networks via informa-
tion, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.00810. 55
Michael Spivak. Calculus on manifolds. Westview Press, Philadelphia, PA, January 1971. 26
Tianxiang Sun, Yunfan Shao, Hong Qian, Xuanjing Huang, and Xipeng Qiu. Black-box tuning for
language-model-as-a-service, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.03514. 10
Zhaodong Sun, Fabian Latorre, Thomas Sanchez, and Volkan Cevher. A plug-and-play deep im-
age prior. In ICASSP 2021 - 2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 8103–8107. IEEE, June 2021. doi: 10.1109/icassp39728.2021.
9414879. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP39728.2021.9414879. 10
Zhiqing Sun and Yiming Yang. An em approach to non-autoregressive conditional sequence gen-
eration.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
URL https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:220265867. 58
Denis Sutter, Julian Minder, Thomas Hofmann, and Tiago Pimentel. The non-linear representation
dilemma: Is causal abstraction enough for mechanistic interpretability?, 2025. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2507.08802. 9, 35
Gemma Team, Aishwarya Kamath, Johan Ferret, Shreya Pathak, Nino Vieillard, Ramona Merhej,
Sarah Perrin, Tatiana Matejovicova, Alexandre Ram´e, Morgane Rivi`ere, Louis Rouillard, Thomas
Mesnard, Geoffrey Cideron, Jean bastien Grill, Sabela Ramos, Edouard Yvinec, Michelle Cas-
bon, Etienne Pot, Ivo Penchev, Ga¨el Liu, Francesco Visin, Kathleen Kenealy, Lucas Beyer, Xi-
aohai Zhai, Anton Tsitsulin, Robert Busa-Fekete, Alex Feng, Noveen Sachdeva, Benjamin Cole-
man, Yi Gao, Basil Mustafa, Iain Barr, Emilio Parisotto, David Tian, Matan Eyal, Colin Cherry,
Jan-Thorsten Peter, Danila Sinopalnikov, Surya Bhupatiraju, Rishabh Agarwal, Mehran Kazemi,
Dan Malkin, Ravin Kumar, David Vilar, Idan Brusilovsky, Jiaming Luo, Andreas Steiner, Abe
Friesen, Abhanshu Sharma, Abheesht Sharma, Adi Mayrav Gilady, Adrian Goedeckemeyer, Alaa
Saade, Alex Feng, Alexander Kolesnikov, Alexei Bendebury, Alvin Abdagic, Amit Vadi, Andr´as
Gy¨orgy, Andr´e Susano Pinto, Anil Das, Ankur Bapna, Antoine Miech, Antoine Yang, Antonia
Paterson, Ashish Shenoy, Ayan Chakrabarti, Bilal Piot, Bo Wu, Bobak Shahriari, Bryce Petrini,
Charlie Chen, Charline Le Lan, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, CJ Carey, Cormac Brick, Daniel
Deutsch, Danielle Eisenbud, Dee Cattle, Derek Cheng, Dimitris Paparas, Divyashree Shivaku-
mar Sreepathihalli, Doug Reid, Dustin Tran, Dustin Zelle, Eric Noland, Erwin Huizenga, Eu-
gene Kharitonov, Frederick Liu, Gagik Amirkhanyan, Glenn Cameron, Hadi Hashemi, Hanna
Klimczak-Pluci´nska, Harman Singh, Harsh Mehta, Harshal Tushar Lehri, Hussein Hazimeh, Ian
Ballantyne, Idan Szpektor, Ivan Nardini, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Jetha Chan, Joe Stanton, John Wi-
eting, Jonathan Lai, Jordi Orbay, Joseph Fernandez, Josh Newlan, Ju yeong Ji, Jyotinder Singh,
Kat Black, Kathy Yu, Kevin Hui, Kiran Vodrahalli, Klaus Greff, Linhai Qiu, Marcella Valentine,
Marina Coelho, Marvin Ritter, Matt Hoffman, Matthew Watson, Mayank Chaturvedi, Michael
Moynihan, Min Ma, Nabila Babar, Natasha Noy, Nathan Byrd, Nick Roy, Nikola Momchev, Ni-
lay Chauhan, Noveen Sachdeva, Oskar Bunyan, Pankil Botarda, Paul Caron, Paul Kishan Ruben-
stein, Phil Culliton, Philipp Schmid, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Pingmei Xu, Piotr Stanczyk, Pouya
Tafti, Rakesh Shivanna, Renjie Wu, Renke Pan, Reza Rokni, Rob Willoughby, Rohith Vallu,
Ryan Mullins, Sammy Jerome, Sara Smoot, Sertan Girgin, Shariq Iqbal, Shashir Reddy, Shruti
Sheth, Siim P˜oder, Sijal Bhatnagar, Sindhu Raghuram Panyam, Sivan Eiger, Susan Zhang, Tianqi
Liu, Trevor Yacovone, Tyler Liechty, Uday Kalra, Utku Evci, Vedant Misra, Vincent Roseberry,
Vlad Feinberg, Vlad Kolesnikov, Woohyun Han, Woosuk Kwon, Xi Chen, Yinlam Chow, Yuvein
15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Zhu, Zichuan Wei, Zoltan Egyed, Victor Cotruta, Minh Giang, Phoebe Kirk, Anand Rao, Kat
Black, Nabila Babar, Jessica Lo, Erica Moreira, Luiz Gustavo Martins, Omar Sanseviero, Lucas
Gonzalez, Zach Gleicher, Tris Warkentin, Vahab Mirrokni, Evan Senter, Eli Collins, Joelle Bar-
ral, Zoubin Ghahramani, Raia Hadsell, Yossi Matias, D. Sculley, Slav Petrov, Noah Fiedel, Noam
Shazeer, Oriol Vinyals, Jeff Dean, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Clement Farabet, Elena
Buchatskaya, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Rohan Anil, Dmitry, Lepikhin, Sebastian Borgeaud, Olivier
Bachem, Armand Joulin, Alek Andreev, Cassidy Hardin, Robert Dadashi, and L´eonard Hussenot.
Gemma 3 technical report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.19786. 7
Rahul Thomas, Louai Zahran, Erica Choi, Akilesh Potti, Micah Goldblum, and Arka Pal. Hidden
no more: Attacking and defending private third-party LLM inference. In Proceedings of the 42nd
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2505.18332. 10
Yuxin Wen, Neel Jain, John Kirchenbauer, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein.
Hard prompts made easy: Gradient-based discrete optimization for prompt tuning and discovery,
2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.03668. 8, 10, 49
Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and William W. Cohen. Breaking the softmax
bottleneck: A high-rank rnn language model. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations (ICLR), 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.03953. 9
Chulhee Yun, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Ankit Singh Rawat, Sashank Reddi, and Sanjiv Kumar. Are
transformers universal approximators of sequence-to-sequence functions? In International Con-
ference on Learning Representations, 2020.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=ByxRM0Ntvr. 58
Collin Zhang, John X. Morris, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Extracting prompts by inverting llm outputs,
2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15012. 10
16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
APPENDIX OVERVIEW
A Preliminaries
17
A.1
Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
A.2
Real-Analyticity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
A.3
Differential, Measure-Theoretic, and Topological Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
B
Transformer Language Model
27
C Almost Sure Injectivity
32
C.1
Absolute continuity ensures almost sure injectivity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
C.2
Absolute continuity of the parameter distribution is preserved under GD . . . . . .
35
D Left-Invertibility Via SipIt
43
D.1
One-Step Last-Token Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
D.2
The Core Routines: Local Verifiers, Acceptance Regions, and Policies . . . . . . .
44
D.3
Global Inversion via SIPIT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
E
Implementation Details and Additional Experiments
48
E.1
Implementation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
E.2
Additional Ablations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
E.3
Identical Next-Token . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
E.4
Prompts with Similar Representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
E.5
Relation with Anisotropy and Intrinsic Dimension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
F
Real-Analytic Activation Functions in Modern LLMs
56
A
PRELIMINARIES
This section fixes the notation used throughout the main paper and the appendix (subsection A.1),
and it introduces real-analyticity as the organizing theme (subsection A.2). We first review the
vector-space notion and its basic closure/composition properties (subsubsection A.2.1), together
with a zero-set principle used in measure-zero arguments. We then extend these ideas to maps
between matrix spaces (subsubsection A.2.2) via vectorization/matricization and note that analytic-
ity is preserved under matrix compositions. To streamline later proofs, we summarize real-analytic
building blocks commonly used in transformer layers–polynomials, exponential/logarithm, softmax,
row normalization, matrix products, Hadamard scaling, and stacking (subsubsection A.2.3). Finally,
in subsection A.3, we collect differential and topological tools–Fr´echet derivatives and the Hessian,
standard facts on Rp, the inverse function theorem, and pushforwards/absolute continuity–which
we use for local invertibility and absolute-continuity arguments. Readers already comfortable with
these topics can skim now and return to specific subsections as needed.
A.1
NOTATION
For arbitrary T ∈N, we write [T] = {1, 2, . . . , T} to denote the set of positive integers up to T.
Additionally, we denote the strictly positive real numbers as R+ = (0, ∞) and the non-negative real
numbers as R+
0 = [0, ∞). Similarly, we let N0 = N ∪{0}.
17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Discrete sets are denoted by uppercase calligraphic letters V, and a sequence of length K is denoted
by lowercase letters: s = ⟨s1, . . . , sK⟩∈VK. We write |s| = K to denote the length of the
sequence. The set of non-empty sequences of length at most K is denoted as V≤K = SK
k=1 Vk.
Non-discrete sets are denoted by uppercase calligraphic bold-face letters B.
Remark 1. We will often refer to a discrete set V as the vocabulary and to an element s ∈V≤K as
an input, context, or prompt.
Matrices (vectors) are denoted by uppercase (lowercase) bold-face letters: X ∈Rd1×d2 (x ∈Rd).
For vectors and matrices, we frequently use standard norms and common matrix operations. The
Hadamard and Kronecker products are defined following Kolda & Bader (2009):
• p-norm: For a vector x ∈Rd, the ℓp norm is defined as
∥x∥p =
 d
X
i=1
|xi|p
! 1
p
.
• Frobenius norm: For a matrix X ∈Rd1×d2, the Frobenius norm is defined as
∥X∥F =
q
tr(XX⊤) =
v
u
u
t
d1
X
i=1
d2
X
j=1
X2
ij.
• Hadamard product: The Hadamard (element-wise) product is defined for vectors and matrices
of the same shape:
(x ⊙y)i = xiyi,
for all i ∈[d],
(X ⊙Y)ij = XijYij,
for all i ∈[d1], j ∈[d2],
where x, y ∈Rd and X, Y ∈Rd1×d2.
• Kronecker product: The Kronecker product of X ∈Rd1×d2 and Z ∈Rd3×d4 is denoted X ⊗Z
and defined blockwise as
X ⊗Z =


X11Z
· · ·
X1d2Z
...
...
...
Xd11Z
· · ·
Xd1d2Z

∈R(d1d3)×(d2d4).
We denote the all-zeros matrix of size m × n as 0m×n, and the all-zeros vector of length m as 0m.
Similarly, we write 1m for the all-ones vector of length m, and Im (or Im×m when dimensions must
be explicit) for the m × m identity matrix.
Let f : V≤K × Rp →Rd be a function over a finite vocabulary V and K ∈N. We refer to f as the
model, to its first argument as the input sequence, and to its second argument as the parameters.
Remark 2. Throughout our analysis, we assume a finite set of possible input sequences, reflect-
ing the practical limitations and design choices of modern LLMs, specifically the bounded context
length.
Remark 3. We take the codomain of the model to be Rd, corresponding to the space of token
embeddings. This allows us to study how the final embedding (typically used to compute next-token
probabilities) depends on both the input sequence and the model parameters.
A.2
REAL-ANALYTICITY
We now introduce the central notion for our analysis: real-analyticity. In its standard form, real-
analyticity is defined for functions f : U →Rn, where U ⊆Rm is an open set. Since the
transformer architecture is naturally expressed in terms of matrices, it will be convenient to extend
this notion to maps of the form f : Rm×n →Ra×b.
Multi-index notation. We use multi-index notation for both vectors and matrices.
18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Vector case. Let α = (α1, . . . , αm)⊤∈Nm
0 and x, y ∈Rm. Define:
|α| =
m
X
j=1
αj,
α! =
m
Y
j=1
αj!,
(x −y)α =
m
Y
j=1
(xj −yj)αj.
Matrix case. Let A = (αuv) ∈Nm×n
0
and X, Y ∈Rm×n. Define:
|A| =
m
X
u=1
n
X
v=1
αuv,
A! =
m
Y
u=1
n
Y
v=1
αuv!,
(X −Y)A =
m
Y
u=1
n
Y
v=1
(Xuv −Yuv)αuv.
Given an open set U ⊆Rm and a map f : U →R, we write
dαf(x) :=
∂|α|f
∂xα1
1 · · · ∂xαm
m
(x)
for the mixed partial derivative (when it exists). Unless stated otherwise, we assume f ∈C∞(U), so
dαf exists and is continuous for all α ∈Nm
0 ; for vector-valued maps f = (f1, . . . , fn) the operator
dα acts componentwise. We also use the convention d0f = f.
A.2.1
REAL-ANALYTIC FUNCTIONS WITH VECTOR INPUTS
We begin with the standard vector-space definition and its basic algebraic properties. These are the
building blocks from which all later analyticity arguments are assembled.
Definition A.1 (Real-analytic functions, Lewis 2014, Definition 1.1.3). Let U ⊆Rm be open. A
function f : U →R is real-analytic on U if, for every y ∈U, there exist coefficients {cα ∈R}α∈Nm
0
and r > 0 such that
f(x) =
X
α∈Nm
0
cα (x −y)α
for all x ∈U with ∥x −y∥2 < r. The set of real-analytic functions on U is denoted by Cω(U).
A map f : U →Rn is real-analytic on U if each of its components f1, . . . , fn : U →R is
real-analytic. The set of such maps is denoted Cω(U ; Rn).
Remark 4. To establish real-analyticity of a vector-valued mapping (e.g., an MLP, attention mech-
anism, or LayerNorm), it suffices to prove real-analyticity of each scalar component.
Proposition A.1 (Closure properties, Lewis 2014, Proposition 1.2.1). Let f, g : Rm →R be real-
analytic maps. Then, the following hold:
1. Addition: f + g ∈Cω(Rm).
2. Product: fg ∈Cω(Rm).
3. Quotient: If g(x) ̸= 0 for all x ∈Rm, then f/g ∈Cω(Rm).
Proposition A.2 (Composition, Lewis 2014, Proposition 1.2.2). Let f : Rm →Rn and g : Rn →
Rk be real-analytic maps. Then, the composition g ◦f : Rm →Rk is real-analytic.
Remark 5. For simplicity, we do not state the closure properties in their most general form, where
f and g may be defined on different open subsets of Rm. This avoids additional notation involving
intersections of domains. Since every function of interest in our later analysis is defined on the whole
space Rm, this restriction entails no loss of generality.
Theorem A.1 (Zero sets of nontrivial real-analytic maps Mityagin 2015). Let U ⊆Rm be connected
and open, and let f ∈Cω(U ; Rn). If f ̸≡0n, then its zero set
Z(f) := f −1({0n}) = {x ∈U : f(x) = 0n}
has Lebesgue measure zero in Rm (i.e. Lebm
 Z(f)

= 0). Equivalently, if there exists x ∈U with
f(x) ̸= 0n, then Lebm
 f −1({0n})

= 0.
19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Remark 6. The result in Mityagin (2015) is stated for scalar-valued maps f : U →R. The
extension to vector-valued maps f = (f1, . . . , fn) : U →Rn is immediate: the zero set of f is the
intersection of the zero sets of its scalar components,
Z(f) =
n
\
i=1
Z(fi),
and if f ̸≡0n, then at least one component fj ̸≡0, so Z(f) ⊆Z(fj), which has measure zero by
the scalar case.
A.2.2
REAL-ANALYTIC FUNCTIONS WITH MATRIX INPUTS
Since transformer layers operate on matrices (e.g., X ∈RT ×d), we need to extend real-analyticity
from vector spaces to matrix spaces. The key tool is the vectorization operator, which lets us reduce
matrix-analytic questions to the vector case treated above.
Definition A.2 (Real-analyticity on matrix spaces). Let U ⊆Rm×n be open. A function f : U →R
is real-analytic on U if, for every Y ∈U, there exist coefficients {cA ∈R}A∈Nm×n
0
and r > 0 such
that
f(X) =
X
A∈Nm×n
0
cA(X −Y)A
for all X ∈U with ∥X −Y∥F < r.
A map f : U →Ra×b is real-analytic on U if each of its components fij : U →R is real-analytic.
The set of such maps is denoted Cω(U ; Ra×b).
Remark 7. In the special case where n = b = 1, the domain and codomain reduce to Rm and
Ra, respectively. Then Definition A.2 recovers Definition A.1. Thus, Definition A.2 generalizes
real-analyticity to functions between matrix spaces.
Definition A.3 (Vectorization and matricization Operators). Let vecm,n : Rm×n →Rmn denote the
standard vectorization operator, which stacks the columns of a matrix into a single column vector
(Henderson & Searle, 1981).
We also define the corresponding matricization operator matm,n : Rmn →Rm×n. As shown in
Chac´on & Duong 2020, the vectorization and matricization operators are mutual inverses:
matm,n
 vecm,n(X)

= X
∀X ∈Rm×n
(7)
vecm,n
 matm,n(x)

= x
∀x ∈Rmn
(8)
Furthermore, if x ∈Rmn and X ∈Rm×n are related by vectorization and matricization, i.e.,
x = vecm,n(X) and X = matm,n(x), then their norms coincide:
∥x∥2 = ∥X∥F.
Definition A.4 (Vectorized Form of Function). Let U ⊆Rm×n be open and ˜U = vecm,n(U)
(also open since vec is a linear homeomorphism). We denote the vectorized form of a function
f : U →Ra×b as
˜f := veca,b ◦f ◦matm,n : ˜U →Rab.
Equivalently, for all X ∈U:
f(X) = mata,b

˜f
 vecm,n(X)

(9)
Lemma A.1 (Equivalence real-analyticity). Let U ⊆Rm×n be open, ˜U = vecm,n(U), and let
f : U →Ra×b with its vectorized form ˜f : ˜U →Rab.
Fix Y ∈U and set y = vecm,n(Y) ∈˜U. Then the following are equivalent:
1. f is real-analytic at Y (in the sense of Definition A.2).
2. ˜f is real-analytic at y (in the sense of Definition A.1).
20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Proof. We begin by establishing the correspondence between matrix and vector indices in Rk×ℓand
Rkℓ. For s ∈[kℓ], define:
u(s) := 1 + (s −1) mod k
(row index)
v(s) := 1 +
s −1
k

(column index)
Then (u(s), v(s)) ∈[k] × [ℓ] gives the matrix coordinates corresponding to the sth entry of the
vectorization. Conversely, for (u, v) ∈[k] × [ℓ], define:
s(u, v) := u + (v −1)k ∈[kℓ]
to recover the linear index.
When clear from context, we omit arguments and simply write u, v, or s for readability.
Let X, Y ∈Rm×n, with vectorizations x = vecm,n(X) and y = vecm,n(Y). For a vector multi-
index α ∈Nmn
0
, define the corresponding matrix multi-index Aα := matm,n(α), so that:
(x −y)α =
mn
Y
s=1
(xs −ys)αs =
m
Y
u=1
n
Y
v=1
(Xuv −Yuv)(Aα)uv = (X −Y)Aα.
(10)
Similarly, for a matrix multi-index A ∈Nm×n
0
, define the corresponding vector multi-index αA :=
vecm,n(A), giving:
(X −Y)A =
m
Y
u=1
n
Y
v=1
(Xuv −Yuv)Auv =
mn
Y
s=1
(xs −ys)(αA)s = (x −y)αA.
(11)
Now let M ∈U, and let m = vecm,n(M) ∈˜U. By definition of the vectorization,
fuv(M) = ˜fs(m),
where s = s(u, v).
This coordinate-wise correspondence underlies the equivalence stated in the lemma.
(⇒) Assume f is real-analytic at Y. Then by Definition A.2, there exists r > 0 and, for each (u, v),
coefficients {c(uv)
A
}A∈Nm×n
0
such that:
fuv(X) =
X
A∈Nm×n
0
c(uv)
A
(X −Y)A,
∀X ∈U : ∥X −Y∥F < r.
(12)
Using Equation 11, each component ˜fs of ˜f can be expressed as:
˜fs(x) =
X
α∈Nmn
0
˜c(s)
α (x −y)α,
where ˜c(s)
αA := c(u(s),v(s))
A
.
This series converges for all x ∈˜U with ∥x−y∥2 = ∥X−Y∥F < r. Hence, each scalar component
of ˜f has a convergent power series at y, proving that ˜f is real-analytic there.
(⇐) The reverse direction follows by symmetry: assume ˜f is real-analytic at y, write the expan-
sion at y using definition Definition A.1, and repeat the argument using Equation 10 to construct
component-wise expansions for fuv at Y.
Remark 8. Consider the function f = vecm,n : Rm×n →Rmn×1, which vectorizes an m × n
matrix by stacking its columns. Its corresponding vectorized form is
˜f(x) = (vecmn,1 ◦vecm,n ◦matm,n)(x) = vecmn,1(x) = x,
since x ∈Rmn is already a column vector . This composition yields the identity map on Rmn,
which is clearly real analytic. Therefore, by Lemma A.1, both vecm,n is real analytic, and similarly,
so is matm,n. It is now evident that the composition of two matrix-valued real-analytic function is
real-analytic, and we will prove it.
21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Proposition A.3 (Composition on matrix spaces is real-analytic). Suppose f : Rm×n →Ra×b and
g : Ra×b →Rp×q are real-analytic (in the sense of Definition A.2). Then g ◦f : Rm×n →Rp×q is
real-analytic.
Proof. Consider the vectorized forms
˜f := veca,b ◦f ◦matm,n : Rmn →Rab,
˜g := vecp,q ◦g ◦mata,b : Rab →Rpq.
By Lemma A.1, f is real-analytic iff ˜f is, and g is real-analytic iff ˜g is. Hence ˜f and ˜g are real-
analytic maps between Euclidean spaces.
The vectorized form of the composition is
]
g ◦f = vecp,q ◦(g ◦f) ◦matm,n =
 vecp,q ◦g ◦mata,b

|
{z
}
˜g
◦
 veca,b ◦f ◦matm,n

|
{z
}
˜
f
= ˜g ◦˜f,
where we inserted the identity (mata,b◦veca,b)(X) = X. By the vector-space composition property
(Proposition A.2), ˜g ◦˜f is real-analytic on Rmn. Applying Lemma A.1 once more, we get that g ◦f
is real-analytic.
A.2.3
REAL ANALYTICITY OF COMMON COMPONENTS
We now catalogue the specific functions that appear inside transformer layers, proving each one
is real-analytic. These building blocks—polynomials, exponentials, softmax, row normalization,
matrix products, Hadamard scaling, and stacking—will be composed in Appendix B to establish the
real-analyticity of the full model. Throughout, all maps are defined on Rm×n (or an open subset
thereof), so Definition A.2 applies.
Proposition A.4 (Polynomials are real-analytic). Let p : Rm →R be a polynomial in the coor-
dinates of x ∈Rm, i.e., p(x) = P
|α|≤d aα xα for some d ∈N0 and coefficients aα ∈R. Then
p ∈Cω(Rm).
Proof. Polynomials are C∞, and dαp ≡0 whenever |α| > d. Hence the Taylor expansion of p at
any y ∈Rm truncates:
p(x) =
X
|α|≤d
dαp(y)
α!
(x −y)α,
which holds for all x ∈Rm (radius r = +∞). Therefore p is real-analytic.
Proposition A.5 (The exponential is real-analytic). The map exp : R →(0, ∞) is real-analytic on
R.
Proof. Define E(x) := P∞
k=0
xk
k! . By the ratio test this power series has infinite radius of conver-
gence, hence converges absolutely for all x ∈R. Standard results on power series imply that E
is C∞on R and can be differentiated termwise within its radius of convergence; in particular, for
every j ∈N0,
E(j)(x) =
∞
X
k=j
k(k −1) · · · (k −j + 1)
k!
xk−j =
∞
X
r=0
xr
r! = E(x).
Fix y ∈R. Taylor’s theorem for power series then yields
E(x) =
∞
X
j=0
E(j)(y)
j!
(x −y)j = E(y)
∞
X
j=0
(x −y)j
j!
,
which is a convergent power series in x −y with infinite radius of convergence. Hence E is real-
analytic at every y ∈R. As E is the usual exponential function defined by its power series, exp is
real-analytic on R.
Proposition A.6 (The logarithm is real-analytic). The map log : (0, ∞) →R is real-analytic on
(0, ∞).
22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Proof. For brevity, we present only a proof sketch;
The exponential map exp : R →(0, ∞) is real-analytic with exp′(y) ̸= 0 for all y. By the real-
analytic inverse function theorem (see Krantz & Parks 2002, Thm. 2.3.1), its local inverse log is
real-analytic on (0, ∞).
The next three results handle the attention-specific operations: softmax, row normalization (used in
the causal projection form), and entrywise matrix polynomials.
Proposition A.7 (Softmax is real-analytic). The map softmax : Rm →Rm with components
softmaxi(x) =
exi
Pm
j=1 exj ,
i = 1, . . . , m,
is real-analytic on Rm.
Proof. Fix i. The numerator x 7→exi is the composition of the coordinate projection πi(x) =
xi (a linear, hence real-analytic, map) with exp; by Proposition A.5 and the composition rule in
Proposition A.1, it is real-analytic. The denominator
H(x) =
m
X
j=1
exj
is a finite sum of real-analytic functions, hence real-analytic. Moreover, H(x) > 0 for all x ∈Rm
because exj > 0. Therefore, by the quotient rule in Proposition A.1, the map
x 7→
exi
H(x)
is real-analytic on Rm. Since this holds for each i = 1, . . . , m, the vector-valued map softmax is
real-analytic.
Proposition A.8 (Row normalization is real-analytic on positive row-sum domain). Let
DT :=

Y ∈RT ×T : Y1T ∈(0, ∞)T 	
.
Define RN(Y) = diag(Y1T )−1Y on DT . Then RN : DT →RT ×T is real-analytic (in the sense
of Definition A.2).
Proof. The map Y 7→s := Y1T is linear, hence real-analytic. On (0, ∞)T , the entrywise re-
ciprocal s 7→s⊙(−1) is real-analytic (componentwise t 7→1/t). The map s 7→diag(s) is linear.
Matrix multiplication (A, Y) 7→AY is real-analytic (Proposition A.10). Composing these gives
RN(Y) = diag(Y1T )−1Y real-analytic on the open set DT .
Proposition A.9 (Entrywise matrix polynomials are real-analytic). Fix m, n ∈N. For coefficients
{cA ∈R}A∈Nm×n
0
and some d ∈N0, define the function p : Rm×n →R by:
p(X) =
X
|A|≤d
cA XA,
(13)
where XA = Qm
u=1
Qn
v=1 XAuv
uv
as defined in the multi-index notation above. Then p is real-
analytic on Rm×n (in the sense of Definition A.2).
Moreover, if f : Rm×n →Ra×b has component functions fij of the form Equation 13, then f is
real-analytic.
Proof. Consider the vectorized form ˜p := p ◦matm,n : Rmn →R. Using the coordinate identifi-
cation from equation 11-equation 10, each monomial satisfies
 matm,n(x)
A = xαA,
23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
where αA = vecm,n(A). Hence:
˜p(x) =
X
|A|≤d
cA xαA,
which is a standard multivariate polynomial in x ∈Rmn. By Proposition A.4, such functions are
real-analytic on all of Rmn, so ˜p ∈Cω(Rmn). By Lemma A.1, this implies p is real-analytic on
Rm×n.
For the second claim, observe that if each fij is a scalar polynomial of the form Equation 13, then
each fij is real-analytic by the argument above. Hence, by Definition A.2, f is real analytic.
Finally, we record the algebraic operations—matrix multiplication, Hadamard scaling, concatena-
tion, and noncommutative matrix polynomials—that allow us to compose the above primitives into
full transformer layers.
Proposition A.10 (Matrix product of real-analytic factors). Let the functions f : Rm×n →Rp×r
and g : Rm×n →Rr×q be real-analytic. Then, h : Rm×n →Rp×q defined as h(X) = f(X) g(X),
is real-analytic on Rm×n.
Proof. For each (i, j) ∈[p] × [q], it holds that hij(X) = Pr
k=1 fik(X) gkj(X).
Each factor fik and gkj is a real-analytic scalar map by assumption; their product is real-analytic
by Proposition A.1, and a finite sum of real-analytic functions is real-analytic. Thus every hij is
real-analytic, hence h is real-analytic.
Proposition A.11 (Hadamard (element-wise) scaling). Let A ∈Rm×n be a fixed matrix. Then, the
map f : Rm×n →Rm×n defined as f(X) = A ⊙X is real-analytic on Rm×n.
Proof. Componentwise, (A ⊙X)ij = Aij Xij is a product of a constant and a coordinate function,
hence a polynomial (degree ≤1) and thus real-analytic.
Proposition A.12 (Concatenation/stacking of real-analytic blocks). Let fℓ: Rm×n →Rp×qℓbe
real-analytic for ℓ∈[L]. The horizontal concatenation operation g : Rm×n →Rp×(q1+···+qL),
defined as:
g(X) =

f1(X) f2(X) · · · fL(X)

is real-analytic. Likewise, if fℓ: Rm×n →Rpℓ×q are real-analytic, then the vertical stacking
operation h : Rm×n →R(p1+···+pL)×q, defined as:
h(X) =

f1(X)⊤f2(X)⊤· · · fL(X)⊤⊤
is real-analytic.
Proof. Each scalar component of g (respectively h) is exactly one scalar component of some fℓ,
hence real-analytic. Therefore g and h are real-analytic by definition Definition A.2.
Proposition A.13 (Noncommutative matrix polynomials are real-analytic). Let n, p, q ∈N, let
X ∈Rn×n, and fix coefficient matrices Ak ∈Rp×n and Bk ∈Rn×q for k = 0, . . . , d. Define
f(X) :=
d
X
k=0
Ak Xk Bk ∈Rp×q,
X0 := In, Xk+1 := XkX.
Then f is real analytic in the sense of Definition A.2.
Proof. The identity map X 7→X is linear, hence a degree-1 entrywise polynomial; by Proposi-
tion A.9 it is real-analytic. Assume X 7→Xk is real-analytic. With f(X) = Xk and g(X) = X,
Proposition A.10 yields Xk+1 = f(X)g(X) real-analytic; by induction, all powers X 7→Xk are
real-analytic.
For each k, left/right multiplication by fixed matrices preserves real-analyticity via Proposition A.10:
since the constant maps X 7→Ak and X 7→Bk are real-analytic (components are constant polyno-
mials), the composition X 7→Ak Xk Bk is real-analytic. Finally, f is a finite sum of real-analytic
maps, hence real-analytic by closure under addition (apply Proposition A.1 componentwise).
24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Remark 9. We highlight several standard constructions that yield real-analytic maps, omitting
proofs for brevity:
• Affine and bilinear maps. Functions of the form X 7→AXB + C are real-analytic, as they are
obtained via matrix multiplication and addition of constant matrices (Proposition A.10, Proposi-
tion A.1).
• Algebraic expressions in X. Any expression constructed from X using finitely many additions and
matrix multiplications with fixed coefficient matrices, e.g. A0 +A1XB1 +A2XB2XC2- defines
a real-analytic map. This follows from repeated application of Proposition A.10 and closure under
addition.
• Scalar polynomial invariants. Coordinate functions Xij, the trace tr(X), all principal and non-
principal minors, and the determinant det(X) are scalar polynomials in the entries of X, and
hence real-analytic by Proposition A.9.
A.3
DIFFERENTIAL, MEASURE-THEORETIC, AND TOPOLOGICAL TOOLS
This subsection collects the minimal calculus, measure, and topology we will use later. In finite di-
mensions, Fr´echet derivatives let us speak uniformly about Jacobians and Hessians; basic Euclidean
topology lets us control neighborhoods and compactness; the inverse function theorem gives lo-
cal invertibility; and pushforwards/absolute continuity formalize how distributions transform under
measurable maps.
Definition A.5 (Fr´echet derivative (Luenberger, 1997, §7.2-§7.3)). Let U ⊆Rm open, and consider
a function f : U →Rn. We say that f is Fr´echet differentiable at x ∈U if there exists a bounded
linear map A : Rm →Rn such that
lim
∥h∥2→0
∥f(x + h) −f(x) −Ah∥2
∥h∥2
= 0.
The unique operator A is denoted by Df(x) and called the (Fr´echet) derivative of f at x.
Definition A.6 (Second Fr´echet derivative (Magnus & Neudecker, 2019, Ch. 18)). Let U ⊆Rm
open, and consider a function f : U →Rn. Suppose f is Fr´echet differentiable at x. The second
Fr´echet derivative of f at x is the bounded bilinear map D2f(x) : Rm × Rm →Rn defined as:
D2f(x)[h, k] := lim
t→0
Df(x + th)[k] −Df(x)[k]
t
.
Proposition A.14 (Connection to the Hessian). If f : U →R is C2, then D2f(x) is symmetric
(Arora et al., 2021, Thm. 5.1) and can represented by the Hessian matrix ∇2f(x):
D2f(x)[h, k] = h⊤ ∇2f(x)

k,
as noted in Magnus & Neudecker 2019, Ch. 18.
Euclidean topology.
The following standard definitions and facts about Rp are used in the local-
to-global measure argument in Appendix C.
Definition A.7 (Closure of a set in Rp). Let U ⊆Rp. The closure of U, denoted U, is the smallest
closed subset of Rp containing U.
Definition A.8 (Euclidean balls in Rp). Fix p ∈N and equip Rp with the Euclidean norm ∥· ∥2.
For x ∈Rp and r > 0 we define:
B(x, r) := { y ∈Rp : ∥y −x∥2 < r }
B(x, r) := { y ∈Rp : ∥y −x∥2 ≤r }
In Rp with the Euclidean topology one has B(x, r) = B(x, r), i.e. the closed ball equals the
topological closure of the open ball.
Definition A.9 (Second-countable subspace of Rp (Munkres, 2000, §30)). Let X ⊆Rp be equipped
with the subspace topology τX := {U ∩X : U open in Rp}. We say X is second-countable if there
exists a countable family F ⊆τX such that every O ∈τX is a union of members of F. Equivalently,
the countable family
FQ :=

B(x, r) ∩X : x ∈Qp, r ∈Q>0
	
,
is a basis for τX .
25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Proposition A.15 (Standard facts for Rp). Fix p ∈N. The following hold:
1. Hausdorff (Aitken, 2020, Prop. 18): Rp with its Euclidean metric is Hausdorff.
2. Heine-Borel (Munkres, 2000, Thm. 27.3): A subset of Rp is compact iff it is closed and
bounded; in particular, each closed Euclidean ball B(x, r) is compact.
3. Second countability (Munkres, 2000, §13 and Thm. 30.2) : R has a countable base (in-
tervals with rational endpoints); hence Rp, being a finite product of second-countable
spaces, is second-countable. Moreover, subspaces of second-countable spaces are second-
countable.
4. Lindel¨of consequence(Munkres, 2000, Thm. 30.3(a)): Every second-countable space is
Lindel¨of; consequently, every open cover of any subspace of Rp admits a countable sub-
cover.
5. Local compactness of Rp(Munkres, 2000, Thm. 29.2): For any x ∈Rp and open neigh-
borhood W ∋x, there exists ε > 0 with B(x, ε) ⊆W, and B(x, ε) is compact by Heine-
Borel; hence Rp is locally compact. Furthermore, in a Hausdorff space, local compactness
is equivalent to shrinking neighborhoods with compact closures: for every neighborhood
W ∋x there exists an open V with x ∈V ⊆V ⊆W and V compact.
Invertibility and measure transport.
The inverse function theorem and the pushforward for-
malism are the two tools that connect local diffeomorphism charts to global measure-preservation
statements.
Definition A.10 (Ck diffeomorphism Spivak 1971, Ch. 5). Let U, V ⊆Rp be open sets and let
k ∈N ∪{∞}. A map f : U →V is a Ck diffeomorphism if:
1. f is bijective;
2. f is Ck (all partial derivatives up to order k exist and are continuous);
3. the inverse map f −1 : V →U is Ck.
When k = 1 we simply say diffeomorphism. Equivalently, a Ck diffeomorphism is a bijective Ck
map whose inverse is also Ck.
Theorem A.2 (Inverse Function Theorem Rudin 1976, Thm. 9.24). Let U ⊂Rp be open and
f : U →Rp be C1. Suppose a ∈U satisfies det Df(a) ̸= 0. Then there exist open sets U0 ⊂U
with a ∈U0 and V0 ⊂Rp with f(a) ∈V0 such that
f

U0 : U0 →V0
is a C1-diffeomorphism. Moreover, the inverse f −1 : V0 →U0 is C1 and
D
 f −1
(f(x)) =
 Df(x)
−1
∀x ∈U0.
Remark 10. In Theorem A.2 we assume f : U ⊆Rp →Rp, so the Jacobian Df(a) is a p × p
(square) matrix. In this setting,
det Df(a) ̸= 0
⇐⇒
Df(a) is invertible,
and this is exactly the hypothesis that yields a local C1 inverse.
Definition A.11 (Pushforward and absolute continuity (Folland, 1999, §3.2)). Consider a Borel-
measurable map T : Rp →Rp and let µ be a Borel measure on Rp. The pushforward measure T#µ
is the Borel measure on Rp defined by
T#µ(U) := µ
 T −1(U)

,
U ∈B(Rp).
If ν is another Borel measure on Rp, we say T#µ is absolutely continuous with respect to ν, and
write T#µ ≪ν, if for every Borel set U ∈B(Rp):
ν(U) = 0 =⇒T#µ(U) = 0.
In particular, for Lebesgue measure Lebp, to prove T#µ ≪Lebp for every µ ≪Lebp, it suffices to
verify that
Lebp(U) = 0 =⇒Lebp
 T −1(U)

= 0
for all Borel U ⊆Rp.
26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
B
TRANSFORMER LANGUAGE MODEL
This appendix section gives a concise, shape-accurate specification of the decoder-only Transformer
we analyze. We include it both to keep the paper self-contained and because the measure-zero argu-
ments later hinge on architecture-dependent witnesses and exact dimension bookkeeping. We begin
with token and positional embeddings (Definition B.3), define self-attention and its causal variants
(Definition B.5, Definition B.6, Definition B.7), assemble multi-head attention, layer normalization,
and an MLP into a pre-LN residual block (Definition B.8, Definition B.9, Definition B.4, Defini-
tion B.11), stack L such blocks to obtain the model (Definition B.12), and conclude with the unem-
bedding+softmax head (Definition B.10), isolating the last-token representation used in downstream
proofs (Equation 29).
Input processing.
The first stage of the model maps a discrete token sequence into a continuous
matrix representation via learned embeddings.
Definition B.1 (Token Embedding Layer). Let V be a vocabulary, and let d ∈N be the embedding
dimension. For any input sequence s = ⟨s1, . . . , sT ⟩∈V≤K, the Token Embedding Layer is the
function defined as:
E(s) = (Es1, . . . , EsT )⊤∈RT ×d,
(14)
where E ∈R|V|×d is a trainable embedding matrix indexed by elements of V, and Esi ∈Rd denotes
the embedding vector for token si.
This mapping is applied element-wise and is independent of the sequence length T.
Definition B.2 (Positional Embedding Layer). Let V be a vocabulary, and let d ∈N be the em-
bedding dimension. For any input sequence s = ⟨s1, . . . , sT ⟩∈V≤K with T = |s|, the (learned
absolute) Positional Embedding Layer is the function defined as:
PE(s) = (P1, . . . , PT )⊤∈RT ×d,
(15)
where P ∈RK×d is a trainable matrix indexed by positions i ∈[K], and Pi ∈Rd denotes the
embedding vector for position i. This mapping depends only on positions (not on token identities)
and returns the first T rows of P.
Definition B.3 (Embedding Layer). Let V be a vocabulary, K ∈N a context bound, and d ∈N
the embedding width. For any input sequence s = ⟨s1, . . . , sT ⟩∈V≤K with T = |s|, define the
embedding layer as the sum of the token and positional embeddings:
Emb(s) := E(s) + PE(s) =
 Es1 + P1, . . . , EsT + PT
⊤∈RT ×d,
(16)
where E ∈R|V|×d is the trainable token-embedding matrix and P ∈RK×d is the trainable
positional-embedding matrix.
Sub-layer modules.
The Transformer block is built from four reusable sub-layers—an MLP,
(causal) self-attention, multi-head attention, and layer normalization—each defined next.
Definition B.4 (Multi-Layer Perceptron). A Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) with M layers is a func-
tion mlpM : Rd0 →RdM , defined recursively as:
h(1) = W(1)x + b(1)
(17)
h(m) = W(m) σ
 h(m−1)
+ b(m), m ≥2
(18)
mlpM(x) = h(M)
(19)
where x ∈Rd0 is the input, {W(m) ∈Rdm×dm−1}M
m=1 and {b(m) ∈Rdm}M
m=1 are trainable
parameters and σ is an activation function.
Definition B.5 (Self-Attention). A Self-Attention module is a function η : RT ×din →RT ×dη,
defined as:
η(X ; Q, K, V) = softmax
 
(XQ) (XK)⊤
p
dη
!
XV,
(20)
where X ∈RT ×din is the input, Q, K, V ∈Rdin×dη are trainable parameters (query, key, and value
matrices), softmax is applied row-wise, dη is the attention dimension (typically dη < din), and T is
the sequence length.
27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Definition B.6 (Causal Self-Attention, masked form). Define the “causal mask” M ∈R
T ×T as:
Mij =
0,
j ≤i,
−∞,
j > i
Then, a Causal Self-Attention module is a function ˜η : RT ×din →RT ×dη, defined as:
˜η(X ; Q, K, V) = softmax
 
(XQ) (XK)⊤
p
dη
+ M
!
XV,
(21)
where X ∈RT ×din is the input, Q, K, V ∈Rdin×dη are trainable parameters (query, key, and value
matrices), softmax is applied row-wise, dη is the attention dimension (typically dη < din), and T is
the sequence length.
Definition B.7 (Causal Self-Attention, projection form). Define the unit lower-triangular matrix
L ∈RT ×T as Lij = I{j≤i} and consider the row normalization operation RN : DT →RT ×T of
Proposition A.8. Then, a Causal Self-Attention module is a function ˜η : RT ×din →RT ×dη, defined
as:
˜η(X ; Q, K, V) = RN
 
L ⊙exp
 
(XQ) (XK)⊤
p
dη
!!
XV,
(22)
where X ∈RT ×din is the input, Q, K, V ∈Rdin×dη are trainable parameters (query, key, and value
matrices), RN is applied row-wise, dη is the attention dimension (typically dη < din), and T is the
sequence length.
Remark 11. Consider Z =
1
√
dη (XQ) (XK)⊤. Since Lii = 1 for all i ∈[T], we have that

L ⊙exp Z

ii = eZii > 0, hence the row sum P
j≤i eZij ≥eZii > 0 and RN is well-defined.
Definition B.8 (Multi-Head Self-Attention). A Multi-Head Self-Attention module with H heads is
a function attnH : RT ×din →RT ×dout, defined using the Self-Attention map from Definition B.5 or
Definition B.7 with different parameter sets per head:
ηh(X) = η(X ; Q(h), K(h), V(h)),
h ∈[H],
(23)
attnH(X) =

η1(X), . . . , ηH(X)

WO,
(24)
where {Q(h), K(h), V(h) ∈Rdin×dη}H
h=1 are the head-specific parameters and WO ∈RHdη×dout
is the output projection matrix.
Definition B.9 (Layer Normalization). Layer Normalization is a function LN : Rd →Rd, defined
as:
LN(x) = γ ⊙x −µx1d
p
σ2x + ε
+ β,
(25)
where x ∈Rd is the input, µx =
1
d
Pd
i=1 xi and σ2
x =
1
d
Pd
i=1(xi −µx)2 are the mean and
variance of x, vectors β, γ ∈Rd are learnable parameters, and ε ∈R+ is a small constant that
ensures we don’t divide by zero.
Definition B.10 (Unembedding Layer). Let V be a vocabulary and d ∈N and U ∈R|V|×d be a
trainable projection matrix. Define the unembedding map UnEmb : Rd →R|V| by
UnEmb(h) := softmax
 U LN(h)

,
h ∈Rd.
Full architecture assembly.
With all sub-layers in place, we assemble them into a single pre-LN
residual block, stack L such blocks into the Transformer backbone, and append the unembedding
head to form the complete language model.
Definition B.11 (Transformer Block). A Transformer Block consists of a composition of a Multi-
Head Self-Attention layer with H heads (Definition B.8) and an MLP with M layers (Definition B.4),
each preceded by layer normalization (Definition B.9) and wrapped with residual connections.
Given an input X ∈RT ×d, the output TB(X) ∈RT ×d is computed as:
H = X + attnH(X)
(26)
TB(X) = H + mlpM(H),
(27)
28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
where X, H ∈RT ×d are the results of applying layer normalization row-wise to X and H, respec-
tively, each with its own set of learnable parameters and mlpM is applied row-wise. All sub-layer
parameters are dimensioned appropriately.
Definition B.12 (Transformer). Fix L ∈N. For each ℓ∈[L], let TB(ℓ) : RT ×d →RT ×d denote a
Transformer Block (Definition B.11) with its own parameters. Define the module
TrT := TB(L) ◦· · · ◦TB(1).
Each TB(ℓ) maps RT ×d →RT ×d, so the residual additions in Definition B.11 are dimensionally
valid at every depth.
Definition B.13 (Transformer Language Model). Let V denote a finite vocabulary and K ∈N a
fixed context length. A Transformer Language Model with L layers is the composition of an embed-
ding layer (Definition B.3), a Transformer with L blocks (Definition B.12), and an Unembedding
Layer (Definition B.10).
Formally, it is a parameterized function
f : V≤K × Rp →∆|V|−1
defined as follows. Without loss of generality, consider θ = (θ1 ∈Rp1, θ2 ∈Rp2, θ3 ∈Rp3) ∈Rp,
which collects all the model parameters.
For an input sequence s = ⟨s1, . . . , sT ⟩with T ≤K:
H(s ; θ) = Emb(s ; θ1)
(embedding)
(28)
r(s ; θ) =

Tr|s|

H(s ; θ) ; θ2

|s|
(last-token representation)
(29)
f(s ; θ) = UnEmb

r(s ; θ) ; θ3

(next-token prediction)
(30)
Then, the probability of the next-token being Vi is given by:
Pr [ sT +1 = Vi | s ] =
 f(s ; θ)

i,
∀i ∈[|V|].
(31)
Verification of real-analyticity.
We close this section by showing that every module defined
above is jointly real-analytic in its inputs and parameters. This is the technical property that lets
the measure-zero arguments in Appendix C go through. We first record the equivalence between
the two causal-softmax formulations, then verify analyticity of the embedding layer and of each
sub-layer and their compositions.
Proposition B.1 (Equivalence of masked and projection causal softmax). For any logits Z ∈RT ×T ,
let M and L be as in Definitions B.6–B.7. Then, row-wise,
softmax(Z + M) = RN
 L ⊙exp Z

.
Consequently, the two definitions of the Causal Self-Attention are identical.
Proof. Fix a row i. By the mask:

softmax(Z + M)

ij =





eZij
P
k≤i eZik ,
j ≤i,
0,
j > i,
interpreting −∞via a limit. On the other hand, it holds that:
[L ⊙exp Z]ij = Ij≤i eZij.
Therefore, L ⊙exp Z keeps exactly the entries with j ≤i. Then, for each row, row normalization
divides the kept entries by the same positive sum P
k≤i eZik and leaves the others at 0, yielding the
same row as above. This holds for every row i, proving the identity.
29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Proposition B.2 (Embedding layer is real-analytic in the parameters). Fix a sequence s =
⟨s1, . . . , sT ⟩∈V≤K with T = |s|. Consider the map
(E, P) 7−→Emb(s) = E(s) + PE(s) ∈RT ×d,
E ∈R|V|×d, P ∈RK×d.
Then this map is real-analytic on R|V|×d × RK×d (in the sense of Definition A.2).
Proof. Let Ss ∈{0, 1}T ×|V| select rows {si}T
i=1, and RT ∈{0, 1}T ×K select the first T rows.
Then
E(s) = SsE,
PE(s) = RT P,
Emb(s) = SsE + RT P.
Each map (E, P) 7→SsE and (E, P) 7→RT P is a matrix product of a constant matrix with the
variable (constant maps are real-analytic as degree-0 polynomials by Proposition A.9; the product
is real-analytic by Proposition A.10). Their sum is real-analytic by closure under addition (Proposi-
tion A.1). Hence (E, P) 7→Emb(s) is real-analytic.
Proposition B.3 (Joint real-analyticity of core modules and stacks). Assume the pointwise activation
σ : R →R used in the MLP is real-analytic (e.g., tanh, GELU). Fix T ∈[K]. For notational
convenience define the parameter tuples
Θattn :=

{Q(h), K(h), V(h)}H
h=1, WO
,
Θ(1)
LN := (γ(1), β(1)),
Θ(2)
LN := (γ(2), β(2)),
Θmlp :=
 {W(m), b(m)}M
m=1

,
ΘTB :=
 Θattn, Θ(1)
LN, Θ(2)
LN, Θmlp

,
ΘTr,T :=
 Θ(1)
TB, . . . , Θ(L)
TB

.
Then the following maps are jointly real-analytic in their inputs and parameters:
1. MLP. (x, Θmlp) 7→mlpM(x) is real-analytic: each affine layer (W, b, x) 7→Wx + b is a
matrix product plus addition (Proposition A.10 and Proposition A.1); the activation σ is real-
analytic by assumption, and composition preserves real-analyticity (Proposition A.2). Iteration
over M layers is repeated composition (Proposition A.2).
2. Layer Normalization. (x, γ, β) 7→LN(x) = γ ⊙
x−µx
√
σ2x+ε + β is real-analytic: µx and σ2
x are
(entrywise) polynomials in x (Proposition A.9); g(x) = σ2
x + ε satisfies g(x) > 0 (definition of
ε > 0), and the scalar map h(t) = t−1/2 is real-analytic on (0, ∞) (classical binomial series).
Thus h ◦g is real-analytic (Proposition A.2); division by g1/2 is a quotient by a nonvanishing
real-analytic function (Proposition A.1); Hadamard scaling by γ and addition of β preserve real-
analyticity (Proposition A.11 and Proposition A.1). Row-wise application is handled by stacking
(Proposition A.12) and the vectorization equivalence (Lemma A.1).
3. Unembedding. (h, U, γ, β) 7→softmax
 U LN(h)

is real-analytic: LN is real-analytic by
(2); multiplication by U is real-analytic (Proposition A.10); softmax is real-analytic (Proposi-
tion A.7); the overall map is a composition (Proposition A.2) and stacking across coordinates
(Proposition A.12).
4. Self-Attention (vanilla or causal) and Multi-Head. Let Z =
1
√
dη (XQ) (XK)⊤.
(a) Vanilla SA: (X, Q, K, V) 7→softmax(Z)XV is real-analytic by: matrix products (Propo-
sition A.10), scaling, row-wise softmax (Proposition A.7 with stacking, Proposition A.12, and
Lemma A.1), and a final matrix product.
(b) Causal SA (projection form): With L unit lower-triangular and using Definition B.7,
(X, Q, K, V) 7−→RN
 L ⊙exp Z

XV
is real-analytic: exp is real-analytic (Proposition A.5); Hadamard scaling by fixed L is real-
analytic (Proposition A.11); by Remark 11, every row of L ⊙exp(Z) sums to a strictly positive
value (the diagonal term), so the argument lies in the domain DT of Proposition A.8; hence RN
is real-analytic there; the final multiplication by XV is real-analytic (Proposition A.10).
Therefore, each single attention head is real-analytic whether it is vanilla or causal (projec-
tion). For Multi-Head Self-Attention (Definition B.8), horizontal concatenation across heads is
real-analytic (Proposition A.12), and the output projection by WO is a matrix product (Proposi-
tion A.10). Hence (X, Θattn) 7→attnH(X) is real-analytic regardless of which attention variant
each head uses.
30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
5. Transformer Block (fixed T). (X, ΘTB) 7→TB(X) ∈RT ×d is real-analytic: apply LN row-
wise to get X (item 2 with stacking, Proposition A.12, and Lemma A.1); apply attention (item 4)
to X; add the residual (closure under addition, Proposition A.1); apply LN row-wise to get H
(item 2 with stacking and Lemma A.1); apply the row-wise MLP (item 1 with stacking, Proposi-
tion A.12); add the residual again (Proposition A.1). All intermediate matrix multiplications use
Proposition A.10, and the overall structure is a composition (Proposition A.3 via Lemma A.1).
6. Transformer (fixed T). (X, ΘTr,T ) 7→TrT (X) = TB(L) ◦· · · ◦TB(1)(X) is a composition of
real-analytic maps from (5), hence real-analytic by Proposition A.3.
All statements extend from vector-valued to matrix-valued, row-wise applications via Proposi-
tion A.12 and Lemma A.1, and every sum/product/quotient/composition step above invokes Propo-
sition A.1, Proposition A.10, and Proposition A.3 as indicated.
31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
C
ALMOST SURE INJECTIVITY
This section establishes a foundational structural result: for causal Transformer Language Models
with standard architectural widths and at least one attention head per block, the final hidden state
at the last token is almost surely injective with respect to the input sequence, assuming the model
parameters are drawn from any absolutely continuous distribution at initialization. Crucially, we
show this injectivity is preserved after any finite number of gradient descent (GD) updates.
We organize the section in two parts; (i) Measure-zero collisions via real-analyticity and a witness
construction and (ii) Preservation of absolute continuity under gradient descent. Each piece builds
toward the main theorem, which asserts that under mild width and head assumptions, the Trans-
former map from input sequences to last-token representations is injective almost surely, even after
multiple rounds of training. The main theorem follows.
Assumption C.1 (Minimum Embedding Dimension). We assume the embedding dimension satisfies
d ≥4 and dη ≥1. Furthermore, we assume that each transformer block has at least one attention
head. These conditions are trivially satisfied in practice: for modern large language models, embed-
ding dimensions are typically in the hundreds or thousands, and each layer has multiple attention
heads, so the assumptions impose no practical restrictions on the models under consideration.
Theorem C.1 (Finite-horizon a.s. injectivity under GD). Fix a finite vocabulary V, a context bound
K ∈N, a time horizon T ∈N, and consider the causal Transformer Language Model (TLM)
of Definition B.13 under Assumption C.1. Let
 st ∈V≤K, pt ∈∆|V|−1	T
t=1 be any sequence
of samples and let {ηt ∈(0, 1)}T
t=1 be any sequence of step-sizes. Assume the parameters are
randomly initialized and updated by gradient descent:
θ0 ∼µ,
µ ≪Lebp,
θt+1 = θt −ηt∇Lst,pt(θt),
where Lebp denotes Lebesgue measure on Rp and Ls,p : Rp →R is the standard cross-entropy loss
Ls,p(θ) = CrossEntropy
 f(s ; θ), p

.
Then, with probability one over the draw of θ0, the last-token, last-layer representation map
V≤K ∋s 7−→r(s ; θT ) ∈Rd
is injective. Equivalently,
Pr

∃s ̸= t ∈V≤K : r(s ; θT ) = r(t ; θT )

= 0,
where r(· ; θT ) denotes the last-token representation defined in Equation (29).
Proof.
Let θ0 ∼µ with µ ≪Lebp. For a fixed training horizon T, define the GD update map
Φ : Rp →Rp,
Φ(θ0) = θT ,
i.e. Φ is the composition of T gradient-descent steps with step sizes {ηt}T
t=1 ⊂(0, 1) on the loss L.
1) Absolute continuity after T steps. By Corollary C.5.1, since µ ≪Lebp, the pushforward law
Φ#µ of θT remains absolutely continuous:
θT ∼Φ#µ ≪Lebp.
2) Global almost-sure distinctness. Let S := V≤K, which is finite. By Corollary C.2.1, under any
absolutely continuous parameter law,
Pr
h
r(s ; θT ) ̸= r(t ; θT )
∀s ̸= t ∈V≤K i
= 1.
Thus the map s 7→r(s ; θT ) is injective almost surely, as claimed.
32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
C.1
ABSOLUTE CONTINUITY ENSURES ALMOST SURE INJECTIVITY
We begin by fixing two distinct sequences and asking when their last-token representations can
coincide. As before, in this subsection we will consider a finite vocabulary V and a finite context
window K ∈N. Additionally, recall that for θ = (θ1, θ2, θ3) ∈Rp:
r(u ; θ) :=

Tr|u|
 Emb(u ; θ1) ; θ2

|u| ∈Rd,
and for s ̸= t, we define the discrepancy:
h(θ) :=
r(s ; θ) −r(t ; θ)
2
2.
By Proposition B.3, this map is real-analytic. To invoke the zero-set theorem, it suffices to show
that h ̸≡0. We construct a parameter configuration θ⋆such that r(s ; θ⋆) ̸= r(t ; θ⋆), treating two
exhaustive cases:
• Case A: If the sequences differ at their final token or in length, we isolate this distinction via
selective initialization of embeddings and positional encodings.
• Case B: If they differ earlier, we construct orthogonal embeddings and exploit attention heads to
differentiate the contributions to the final representation.
In both cases, we demonstrate explicit parameter settings under which the discrepancy is nonzero.
This confirms h ̸≡0, and the zero set

θ : r(s ; θ) = r(t ; θ)
	
has measure zero by Theorem A.1.
Hence, if the parameter distribution is absolutely continuous, the probability of a collision is zero.
A union bound extends this to any finite set of inputs.
Theorem C.2 (Almost-sure pairwise distinctness of last-token representations). Let the parameter
vector θ ∈Rp be drawn from any distribution absolutely continuous with respect to Lebesgue
measure. Then, for any fixed s ̸= t,
Pr [ r(s ; θ) = r(t ; θ) ] = 0.
Proof. Let Ts = |s| and Tt = |t|, and h(θ) :=
r(s ; θ) −r(t ; θ)
2
2. Since h is real-analytic
(Proposition B.3), it suffices to show that it is not the zero function on Rp; then h−1({0}) has
Lebesgue measure zero by Theorem A.1, and absolute continuity transfers this to probability zero.
We construct a parameter setting θ⋆for which h(θ⋆) > 0, treating two exhaustive cases:
Case A: Ts ̸= Tt or sTs ̸= tTt. Set all Transformer parameters to zero so that the network acts as
the identity: TrT (X) = X.
• If sTs ̸= tTt, set EsTs = e1, EtTt = e2 ̸= e1, and all other rows of E to zero. Set P = 0K×d.
Then r(s ; θ⋆) = e1, r(t ; θ⋆) = e2, so h(θ⋆) = ∥e1 −e2∥2
2 > 0.
• If Ts ̸= Tt, set E = 0|V|×d and PTs = e1, PTt = e2 ̸= e1 (all others zero). Then, again,
r(s ; θ⋆) = e1, r(t ; θ⋆) = e2, so h(θ⋆) > 0.
Case B: T := Ts = Tt and sT = tT , but si ̸= ti for some i ∈[T −1]. Let i⋆be the smallest such
index. Note T ≥2.
We construct a model with (i) all blocks after the first set to identity (zero parameters), (ii) in the
first block, all heads set to zero except head 1 and the MLP is zero.
We explicitly construct embeddings and head-1 parameters (Q, K, V), as well as the output projec-
tion WO, so that r(s ; θ⋆) ̸= r(t ; θ⋆).
1) Embedding Construction. Choose orthogonal vectors e, p, q ∈Rd satisfying:
⟨e, p⟩= ⟨e, q⟩= ⟨p, q⟩= 0,
⟨1d, e⟩= ⟨1d, p⟩= ⟨1d, q⟩= 0,
∥e∥2 = ∥p∥2 = ∥q∥2 = 1.
Such vectors exist due to Assumption C.1 (requires d ≥4). Set embeddings:
Ev =
e,
v ∈{si⋆, sT }
0d,
otherwise
,
Pj =



p,
j = i⋆
q,
j = T
0d,
otherwise
.
33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Thus, the input rows before LayerNorm are:
h
H(s ; θ⋆)
i
j =



e + p,
j = i⋆
e + q,
j = T
∈{e, 0d},
otherwise
,
h
H(t ; θ⋆)
i
j =



p,
j = i⋆
e + q,
j = T
∈{e, 0d},
otherwise
.
2) LayerNorm Output. Use LayerNorm with (γ, β) = (1, 0). Since all components have zero
mean, the normalization is:
LN(x) =
x
q
1
d∥x∥2 + ε
=: c(x)x.
Define:
cep :=
  2
d + ε
−1/2 ,
ce :=
  1
d + ε
−1/2 .
Then:
h
H(s ; θ⋆)
i
j =



cep(e + p),
j = i⋆
cep(e + q),
j = T
∈{0d, cee},
otherwise
,
h
H(t ; θ⋆)
i
j =



cep,
j = i⋆
cep(e + q),
j = T
∈{0d, cee},
otherwise
.
3) Head Parameters. Let e1 ∈Rdη be the first standard basis vector. Set:
Q = αee⊤
1 ,
K = βpe⊤
1 ,
V = ee⊤
1 ,
where α, β > 0 are scalars to be chosen.
Then for any j, attention vectors are:
qj = α
h
H(· ; θ⋆)
i
j, e

e1,
kj = β
h
H(· ; θ⋆)
i
j, p

e1,
vj =
h
H(· ; θ⋆)
i
j, e

e1.
At row T, q(s)
T = q(t)
T = αcepe1. Only the key at i⋆is nonzero:
k(s)
i⋆= βcepe1,
k(t)
i⋆= βcee1.
Value vectors at i⋆differ:
v(s)
i⋆= cepe1,
v(t)
i⋆= 0d.
And v(s)
T
= v(t)
T
= cepe1.
4) Attention Weights. The only nonzero score is at i⋆:
S(s)
T,i⋆= αβ
p
dη
c2
ep,
S(t)
T,i⋆= αβ
p
dη
cepce,
S(·)
T,j = 0 for j ̸= i⋆.
Fix δ ∈(0, 1
2) and define L := log
  1−δ
δ (T −1)

. Set αβ =
p
dηL/c2
ep, so S(s)
T,i⋆= L and
S(t)
T,i⋆> L. Then:
A(s)
T,i⋆≥1 −δ,
A(t)
T,i⋆> 1 −δ,
A(·)
T,j ≤
δ
T −1 for j ̸= i⋆.
5) Self-Attention Output.
y(s)
T
= (1 −δ)cepe1 +
X
j̸=i⋆
A(s)
T,jv(s)
j ,
y(t)
T
=
X
j̸=i⋆
A(t)
T,jv(t)
j .
Tails are bounded by:

X
j̸=i⋆
A(·)
T,jv(·)
j

2
≤δce.
34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Since both outputs lie in span{e1}, we compare:
⟨y(s)
T −y(t)
T , e1⟩≥(1 −δ)cep −2δce.
Choosing δ <
cep
cep+2ce makes this strictly positive.
6) Output Projection and Propagation. Let WO be the matrix with (WO)1,1 = 1 and all other
entries zero. Then the head output is projected into coordinate 1, making the last row of the first
transformer block differ between s and t in the first coordinate. Since the original rows at T were
identical and the rest of the network is identity, this difference propagates to the final output, and we
get r(s ; θ⋆) ̸= r(t ; θ⋆).
Remark 12 (Causal Self-Attention). The same construction works for causal self-attention. In our
setup, attention at position T only needs to consider tokens at positions j ≤T, and we only rely on
attention from T to i⋆< T. All nonzero scores occur at these allowable indices, so causal masking
does not affect the computation or the argument.
Corollary C.2.1 (Almost-sure global distinctness over a finite input family). Let S ⊆V≤K be any
finite collection of inputs. If θ is drawn from a law absolutely continuous w.r.t. Lebp, then
Pr

r(s ; θ) ̸= r(t ; θ) for all distinct s, t ∈S

= 1.
In particular, the last-token representations are pairwise distinct almost surely across all inputs.
Proof. For each unordered pair {s, t} ⊂S with s ̸= t, Theorem C.2 gives Pr[ r(s ; θ) = r(t ; θ) ] =
0. By the union bound over the finitely many pairs (
 |S|
2

in total),
Pr
h
∃s ̸= t ∈S : r(s ; θ) = r(t ; θ)
i
≤
X
s,t
Pr

r(s ; θ) = r(t ; θ)

= 0.
Hence the complement event has probability 1.
Remark 13 (Pointwise vs. last-token injectivity). Sutter et al. (2025) establish a related but distinct
guarantee. They analyze the mapping from a prompt to the entire sequence (matrix) of hidden states,
which already rules out collisions for inputs of different lengths. Their result is pointwise injectivity:
if two prompts differ at position t, then the t-th hidden state (row) differs. This does not, by itself,
imply injectivity of the map to the final hidden state / last-token embedding that we study, so two
different prompts could still coincide at the last token–our quantity of operational interest.
C.2
ABSOLUTE CONTINUITY OF THE PARAMETER DISTRIBUTION IS PRESERVED UNDER GD
Our goal in this subsection is to explain why absolute continuity of the parameter law at initialization
survives any finite number of gradient–descent (GD) steps, thereby allowing the almost-sure injec-
tivity argument from the previous subsection to persist throughout training. The argument proceeds
in four steps.
Step 1: Regularity of the GD map.
By Propositions A.6 and B.3, the loss Ls,p is real-analytic,
and real-analyticity is closed under differentiation and composition. Consequently the GD map
ϕ(θ) = θ −η∇Ls,p(θ) is real-analytic, its Jacobian Dϕ(θ) = Ip −η∇2Ls,p(θ) is real-analytic,
and so is θ 7→det Dϕ(θ) (the determinant is a polynomial in the matrix entries).
Step 2: Witness and measure-zero critical set.
We rule out the degenerate case by a witness:
at θ⋆= 0p, our Hessian calculation (Lemma C.4) shows det Dϕ(θ⋆) > 0, hence det Dϕ is not
identically zero and its zero set C := {det Dϕ = 0} has Lebesgue measure zero by the real-analytic
zero–set theorem (Theorem A.1; summarized in Theorem C.3).
35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Step 3: Local-to-global via countable chart covers.
On the complement Rp \ C, the Inverse
Function Theorem (Theorem A.2) provides, for every θ, a neighborhood on which ϕ is a C1 dif-
feomorphism. Although these neighborhoods form an a priori uncountable cover, the second count-
ability of Rp (and of its subspaces) ensures a countable subcover of such charts (Proposition A.15,
Lemma C.5). This countability is crucial because it lets us pass from local statements to a global
measure statement via countable unions. With this cover in hand, the change-of-variables formula
on each chart (Theorem C.4) implies that the image under the local inverse of any null set remains
null; piecing the charts together and adding the null set C shows that preimages of Lebesgue-null
sets under ϕ are null (Lemma C.6).
Step 4: Preservation of absolute continuity and conclusion.
Equivalently, ϕ pushes absolutely
continuous laws to absolutely continuous laws (Theorem C.5); iterating across finitely many GD
steps preserves absolute continuity (Corollary C.5.1). Finally, combining this preservation with the
almost-sure pairwise distinctness of last-token representations over any finite input family (Corol-
lary C.2.1) yields the main consequence we need for training: the last-token representation map
remains injective almost surely after any finite GD horizon.
C.2.1
WITNESS CONSTRUCTION
The goal of this subsubsection is to show that the GD Jacobian determinant is not identically zero
by evaluating it at the all-zeros witness θ⋆= 0p. The argument proceeds bottom-up: we first
establish a “zero-gate” lemma that zeroes out most Hessian blocks when the gate matrix vanishes
(Lemma C.1), derive the resulting spectrum (Lemma C.2, Lemma C.3), and then assemble these
into the full Hessian at the witness (Lemma C.4).
Lemma C.1 (Zero-gate through scalar loss). Let U ⊆Rm+q be open and write points as v = (ξ, ψ)
with ξ ∈Rm and ψ ∈Rq. Let π : Rm+q →Rm be the projection π(ξ, ψ) = ξ. Consider
g ∈C2(Rm ; Rn×r),
h ∈C2(U ; Rr),
and define f : U →Rn by
f(ξ, ψ) := g(ξ) h(ξ, ψ) = g
 π(ξ, ψ)

h(ξ, ψ).
Let L ∈C2(Rn; R) and set
R := L ◦f : U →R,
R(ξ, ψ) = L
 g(ξ) h(ξ, ψ)

.
Fix v0 = (ξ0, ψ0) ∈U and assume g(ξ0) = 0n×r. Then the Hessian of R at v0 has block form
∇2R(v0) =
 
∇2
ξξ R(v0)
∇2
ξψ R(v0)
∇2
ψξ R(v0)
∇2
ψψ R(v0)
!
=
 
∇2
ξξR(v0)
0m×q
0q×m
0q×q
!
.
i.e. all mixed and ψ–only second partials vanish.
Proof.
1) Introduce the bilinear multiplication map µ : Rn×r × Rr →Rn, µ(M, y) = My, and the C2
map H : U →Rn×r × Rr, H(ξ, ψ) = (g(ξ), h(ξ, ψ)). Then f = µ ◦H and we write:
g0 := g(ξ0) = 0n×r
h0 := h(ξ0, ψ0)
H(v0) = (g0, h0).
Because µ is bilinear, Dµ(M, y)[(∆M, ∆y)] = ∆M y + M ∆y. By the chain rule:
Df(v0)

(hξ, hψ)

= Dµ(g0, h0)
h
Dg(ξ0)[hξ], Dh(v0)[(hξ, hψ)]
i
= Dg(ξ0)[hξ] h0 + g0
|{z}
0n×r
Dh(v0)[(hξ, hψ)]
= Dg(ξ0)[hξ] h0.
In particular, Df(v0)

(0m, · )

= 0n. The second-order chain rule for Fr´echet derivatives (e.g.
Magnus & Neudecker 2019, Thm. 18.4) yields:
D2f(v0)[h, k] = D2µ
 H(v0)

DH(v0)[h], DH(v0)[k]

+ Dµ
 H(v0)

D2H(v0)[h, k]

.
36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Because µ is bilinear, D2µ ≡0 and the first term is 0. Furthermore,
D2H(v0)[h, k] =

D2g(ξ0)[hξ, kξ], D2h(v0)

(hξ, hψ), (kξ, kψ)
 
,
and it holds that:
D2f(v0)[h, k] = Dµ(g0, h0)
h
D2g(ξ0)[hξ, kξ], D2h(v0)

(hξ, hψ), (kξ, kψ)
 i
=

D2g(ξ0)[hξ, kξ]

h0 + g0
|{z}
0n×r

D2h(v0)

(hξ, hψ), (kξ, kψ)

=

D2g(ξ0)[hξ, kξ]

h0.
If at least one of the two directions has ξ–component zero, then D2g(ξ0)[hξ, kξ] = 0, so the bilinear
form vanishes.
2) Apply the second-order chain rule to R = L ◦f at v0:
D2R(v0)[h, k] = D2L
 f(v0)

Df(v0)[h], Df(v0)[k]

+ DL
 f(v0)

D2f(v0)[h, k]

. (⋆)
By (1), if at least one of the two directions is pure ψ, both terms on the right-hand side of vanish.
Therefore
D2R(v0)[h, k] = 0
whenever at least one of h, k is of the form (0m, · ).
Invoking Proposition A.14, this is exactly the statement that the ξψ, ψξ and ψψ Hessian blocks are
0. The remaining block ∇2
ξξR(v0) is whatever is induced by (⋆) for pairs
(h, k) =
 (hξ, 0q), (kξ, 0q)

.
Lemma C.2 (Spectrum under block-diagonal extension). Let f ∈C2(Rm+q ; R), and fix v =
(ξ0, ψ0) ∈Rm+q. Assume the Hessian of f at v has the block form
H := ∇2f(v) =
 
B
0m×q
0q×m
0q×q
!
,
B ∈Rm×m.
Then the characteristic polynomial factorizes as
χH(λ) := det
 λIm+q −H

= det
 λIm −B

λq.
Consequently,
σ(H) = σ(B) ∪{0},
and
multH(0) = multB(0) + q,
i.e., the spectrum of H consists of the eigenvalues of B together with q additional zeros, and the
algebraic multiplicity of the eigenvalue 0 for H equals that for B plus q.
Proof. Since H is block diagonal,
λIm+q −H =
 
λIm −B
0m×q
0q×m
λIq
!
.
The determinant of a block triangular (in particular block diagonal) matrix equals the product of the
determinants of its diagonal blocks (e.g. Horn & Johnson 2013, Cor. 0.8.5). Hence
χH(λ) = det(λIm −B) · det(λIq) = det(λIm −B) · λ q.
The zeros of χH are the eigenvalues of H counted with algebraic multiplicity, which yields σ(H) =
σ(B) ∪{0} and multH(0) = multB(0) + q.
Remark 14. If 0 ∈σ(B), then 0 appears in σ(H) with multiplicity strictly larger than q; the
statement above accounts for this by adding q to the algebraic multiplicity of 0 carried over from B.
37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Lemma C.3 (Hessian of L w.r.t. U, β at θ⋆= 0 and its spectrum). Let n := |V| and d be the
embedding width. Fix (s, p) ∈V≤K × ∆n−1, and consider the Transformer Language Model of
Definition B.13. In the unembedding layer, set the LayerNorm scale to zero, γ = 0d. Let the
parameter be ordered as
θ =
 u, β, γ, θ′
,
u := vecn,d(U) ∈Rnd, β ∈Rd.
Restrict attention to the (u, β)-coordinates and the base point
θ⋆= 0p
i.e.
U = 0n×d, β = 0d, γ = 0d, θ′ = 0.
Write b := 1
n1n and w := b −p ∈Rn.
Then the Hessian of the cross-entropy loss
L(θ) = CrossEntropy
 f(s ; θ), p

with respect to (u, β) at θ⋆is the symmetric block matrix
∇2
(u,β)L(θ⋆) =
 
0nd×nd
Id ⊗w
Id ⊗w⊤
0d×d
!
.
The spectrum of this Hessian is
spec
 ∇2
(u,β)L(θ⋆)

= { +∥w∥2, . . . , +∥w∥2
|
{z
}
d
, −∥w∥2, . . . , −∥w∥2
|
{z
}
d
, 0, . . . , 0
| {z }
d(n−1)
}.
Proof.
1) Logits in vectorized form. With γ = 0d, the LayerNorm output at the unembedding is constant:
LN(h) ≡β (Definition B.9). Thus the logits before the final softmax are
Z = U β ∈Rn.
Using vec(AXb) = (b⊤⊗A) vec(X) (standard identity for vectorization, cf. Henderson & Searle
(1981)), with A = In and b = β,
z = vec(Z) = vec(Uβ) = (β⊤⊗In) u.
Therefore, near (u, β) = (0nd, 0d), the logits map is the bilinear function
z(u, β) := (β⊤⊗In) u ∈Rn.
2) First and second differentials. Let (h, η) and (k, ξ) be directions in Rnd × Rd. Differentiating
z(u, β) = (β⊤⊗In)u gives
Dz(u, β)[h, η] = (β⊤⊗In)h + (η⊤⊗In)u.
At (u, β) = (0nd, 0d),
Dz(0nd, 0d)[h, η] = 0n×(nd+d)
(since both terms are multiplied by u or β). Differentiating once more (or, equivalently, using
bilinearity of z) yields the constant symmetric bilinear form
D2z(0nd, 0n)

(h, η), (k, ξ)

= (ξ⊤⊗In) h + (η⊤⊗In) k.
3) Gradient of the CE-in-softmax at the origin. Let F(z) := CrossEntropy(softmax(z), p). A
standard computation (softmax Jacobian) gives
∇zF(z) = softmax(z) −p.
At z = 0n, softmax (0n) = 1
n1n =: b, hence
∇zF(0n) = b −p =: w.
38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
4) Second-order chain rule for F ◦Z at (0, 0). Similarly to the proof of Lemma C.1, the second
differential of a composition is
D2(F ◦z)(v)[h, k] = D2F(z(v))

Dz(v)h, Dz(v)k

+ DF(z(v))

D2z(v)[h, k]

.
At v = (0nd, 0d), Dz(v) = 0n×(nd+d) and DF(z(v)) = ∇zF(0n)⊤= w⊤, so
D2L(v)

(h, η), (k, ξ)

= w⊤D2z(v)

(h, η), (k, ξ)

= w⊤ (ξ⊤⊗In)h + (η⊤⊗In)k

= h⊤(Id ⊗w) ξ + k⊤(Id ⊗w) η,
where we used the mixed-product rule for Kronecker products and the identity
w⊤(ξ⊤⊗In) = ξ⊤⊗w⊤.
5) Identification of the Hessian blocks. By definition of the Hessian as a bilinear form,
D2L(v)

(h, η), (k, ξ)

=

h⊤
η⊤  
0nd×nd
∂2L
∂u ∂β
∂2L
∂β ∂u
0d×d
!  
k
ξ
!
.
Comparing with the expression obtained in Step 4 for arbitrary (h, η) and (k, ξ) forces
∂2L
∂u ∂β (θ⋆) = Id ⊗w,
∂2L
∂β ∂u(θ⋆) =
 Id ⊗w
⊤= Id ⊗w⊤,
and, because Dz(v) = 0n×(nd+d) (so no quadratic term survives in either u or β alone),
∂2L
∂u ∂u(θ⋆) = 0nd×nd,
∂2L
∂β ∂β (θ⋆) = 0d×d.
This gives exactly the claimed block matrix.
6) Spectrum. Let
H := ∇2
(u,β)L(θ⋆) =
 
0nd×nd
Id ⊗w
Id ⊗w⊤
0d×d
!
.
Then
H2 =
 
(Id ⊗w)(Id ⊗w⊤)
0nd×d
0d×nd
(Id ⊗w⊤)(Id ⊗w)
!
=
 
Id ⊗(ww⊤)
0nd×d
0d×nd
Id ⊗(w⊤w)
!
.
The eigenvalues of ww⊤are ∥w∥2
2 (multiplicity 1) and 0 (multiplicity n −1); the eigenvalues of
w⊤w equal ∥w∥2
2 (scalar). Therefore the eigenvalues of H2 are
∥w∥2
2, . . . , ∥w∥2
2
|
{z
}
2d times
,
0, . . . , 0
| {z }
d(n−1) times
.
Because H is symmetric, its eigenvalues are the real square-roots of those of H2, namely ±∥w∥2
(each with multiplicity d) and 0 (with multiplicity d(n −1)). This is exactly the set stated in the
lemma.
Lemma C.4 (Full Hessian at the witness: block form and spectrum). Let n := |V| and d be the
embedding width. Write the parameter as
θ =
 (u, β), (γ, θ′)

,
u = vecn,d(U) ∈Rnd, β, γ ∈Rd, θ′ ∈Rp′,
so p = nd + 2d + p′. Consider the witness point
θ⋆= 0p
(U = 0n×d, β = 0d, γ = 0d, θ′ = 0d).
Let b := 1
n1n and w := b −p ∈Rn. Then the Hessian of the cross-entropy loss L(θ) at θ⋆admits
the block-diagonal decomposition
∇2L(θ⋆) =
 
B
0
0
0
!
,
B =
 
0nd×nd
Id ⊗w
Id ⊗w⊤
0d×d
!
.
Consequently,
spec
 ∇2L(θ⋆)

=
n
+∥w∥2, . . . , +∥w∥2
|
{z
}
d
, −∥w∥2, . . . , −∥w∥2
|
{z
}
d
, 0, . . . , 0
| {z }
p−2d
o
.
39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Proof. Set γ = 0d. Then the unembedding LayerNorm output is constant, LN(h) ≡β, so the logits
equal z = U β. Hence, in a neighborhood of θ⋆, the loss depends only on (u, β) and is independent
of (γ, θ′).
We will apply Lemma C.1 with the open set U = Rnd+2d+p′, coordinates ξ = (u, β) and ψ =
(γ, θ′) and with n = |V|, r = d. Define
g(ξ) := matn,d(u) ∈Rn×d,
h(ξ, ψ) := β ∈Rd,
so that
f(ξ, ψ) := g(ξ) h(ξ, ψ) = U β ∈Rn,
and, with L(z) := CrossEntropy
 softmax(z), p

,
R(ξ, ψ) := L
 f(ξ, ψ)

= CrossEntropy
 softmax(Uβ), p

.
At the witness v0 = (ξ0, ψ0) we have g(ξ0) = 0n×d, so by Lemma C.1 all mixed and ψ–only
second partials of R vanish at v0, i.e.
∇2R(v0) =
 
∇2
(u,β)R(v0)
0
0
0
!
.
Identifying R(ξ, ψ) ≡L(θ) under the correspondence above yields
∇2L(θ⋆) =
 
∇2
(u,β)L(θ⋆)
0
0
0
!
.
Combining, Lemmas C.2 and C.3, we get that
spec
 ∇2L(θ⋆)

= spec
 ∇2
(u,β)L(θ⋆)

∪{0} d+p′
=
n
± ∥w∥2 (each mult. d), 0 (mult. d(n −1) + d + p′)
o
.
Since p = nd + 2d + p′, the multiplicity of 0 equals p −2d, which yields the claimed spectrum.
Theorem C.3 (GD Jacobian is nondegenerate a.e.). Fix a finite vocabulary V, a context bound
K ∈N, and the Transformer language model f of Definition B.13. For any sample (s, p) ∈
V≤K × ∆|V|−1 and any learning rate η ∈(0, 1), let ϕ : Rp →Rp be the gradient-descent update,
defined as:
ϕ(θ) = θ −η ∇θLs,p(θ),
where Ls,p : Rp →R is the standard Cross Entropy loss:
Ls,p(θ) = CrossEntropy
 f(s ; θ), p

.
Then the critical set
C := {θ ∈Rp : det Dϕ(θ) = 0}
has Lebesgue measure zero in Rp.
Proof. By Propositions A.6 and B.3 and the closure properties of real analyticity, Ls,p is real-
analytic; hence so are its gradient and Hessian.
Therefore ϕ is real-analytic (Lewis, 2014,
Thm. 1.1.15) and
Dϕ(θ) = Ip −η ∇2
θLs,p(θ).
Since the determinant is a polynomial in the entries, θ 7→det Dϕ(θ) is real-analytic.
It is not identically zero: at the witness θ⋆= 0p, Lemma C.4 gives
spec
 ∇2L(θ⋆)

= {+∥w∥2, . . . , +∥w∥2
|
{z
}
d
, −∥w∥2, . . . , −∥w∥2
|
{z
}
d
, 0, . . . , 0
| {z }
p−2d
},
w := 1
n1 −p.
Hence the eigenvalues of Dϕ(θ⋆) = Ip −η ∇2L(θ⋆) are
1 −η∥w∥2
|
{z
}
d times
,
1 + η∥w∥2
|
{z
}
d times
,
1
|{z}
p−2d times
,
so
det Dϕ(θ⋆) =
 1 −η2∥w∥2
2
d > 0.
Thus det Dϕ is a nontrivial real-analytic function. By Theorem A.1, its zero set has Lebesgue
measure 0.
40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
C.2.2
GRADIENT DESCENT PRESERVES ABSOLUTE CONTINUITY
With the witness in hand and the critical set shown to be measure-zero (Theorem C.3), we now
carry out Steps 3–4 of the roadmap: cover the non-critical region by countably many diffeomorphic
charts (Lemma C.5), use the change-of-variables formula to show preimages of null sets remain null
(Lemma C.6), and conclude that one GD step preserves absolute continuity (Theorem C.5). Iterating
yields the finite-horizon corollary (Corollary C.5.1).
Lemma C.5 (Countable chart cover of Rp \ C). Consider the setup of Theorem C.5. In particular,
let ϕ : Rp →Rp be the one-step GD map from that theorem:
ϕ(θ) = θ −η ∇θLs,p(θ),
(32)
with stepsize η ∈(0, 1), and the measure-zero critical-set (Theorem C.3):
C := {θ ∈Rp : det Dϕ(θ) = 0}.
Then there exist open sets (Uk)k≥1 covering X := Rp \ C such that, for each k, the restriction
ϕk := ϕ|Uk : Uk →Vk := ϕ(Uk) is a C1 diffeomorphism with C1 inverse ψk := ϕ−1
k .
Proof.
1) X is open: By Propositions A.6 and B.3 and the closure rules of real-analyticity, Ls,p is C2,
hence ϕ is C1. The map θ 7→Dϕ(θ) is continuous, and the determinant is a continuous polynomial
in the entries, so g(θ) := det Dϕ(θ) is continuous. Therefore C = g−1({0}) is closed (Rudin,
1976, Thm. 4.8) and X = Rp \ C is open.
2) Local diffeomorphisms by the Inverse Function Theorem: Fix θ ∈X. Then g(θ) ̸= 0,
so by the Inverse Function Theorem (Theorem A.2) there exist open neighborhoods Uθ ∋θ and
Vθ ∋ϕ(θ) such that
ϕθ := ϕ|Uθ : Uθ →Vθ
is a C1 diffeomorphism with C1 inverse ψθ := ϕ−1
θ . Moreover,
Dψθ(ϕ(x)) =
 Dϕ(x)
−1
∀x ∈Uθ.
In particular Dϕ(x) is invertible for all x ∈Uθ, whence Uθ ⊂X. Thus {Uθ}θ∈X is an open cover
of X by IFT charts.
3) Select a countable subcover: By Proposition A.15(3), Rp is second-countable; subspaces
of second-countable spaces are second-countable, hence X is second-countable.
By Proposi-
tion A.15(4), every open cover of a second-countable space admits a countable subcover. Therefore
there exist points θ1, θ2, . . . ∈X such that X = S∞
k=1 Uθk.
Set Uk := Uθk, Vk := Vθk, and ϕk := ϕ|Uk = ϕθk, ψk := ψθk. Each ϕk is a C1 diffeomorphism
with C1 inverse ψk by Step 2. This yields the desired countable chart cover of X.
Theorem C.4 (Change of Variables Folland 1999, Thm. 2.47(b)). Let U, V ⊆Rp be open and
ψ : V →U a C1 diffeomorphism. If E ⊆V is Lebesgue measurable, then
Lebp
 ψ(E)

=
Z
E
 det Dψ(y)
 dy.
Lemma C.6 (Pre-images of null sets are null). Consider the setup of Theorem C.5, in particular the
C1 gradient descent map:
ϕ(θ) = θ −η∇θLs,p(θ),
η ∈(0, 1),
and its critical set C := {θ ∈Rp : det Dϕ(θ) = 0}. Then, for every measurable A ⊆Rp,
Lebp(A) = 0 =⇒Lebp
 ϕ−1(A)

= 0.
Proof. Let X = Rp \ C and decompose the pre-image:
ϕ−1(A) =
 ϕ−1(A) ∩C

∪
 ϕ−1(A) ∩X

.
41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
The first set is contained in C, a measure zero set (Theorem C.3), hence has Lebp–measure 0. By
Lemma C.5, cover X by countably many charts {Uk} on which ϕk := ϕ|Uk is a C1 diffeomorphism
onto Vk := ϕ(Uk) with inverse ψk ∈C1(Vk ; Uk). Then, it holds that:
ϕ−1(A) ∩Uk = ψk
 A ∩Vk

.
Since Lebp(A) = 0 and both A and Vk are measurable, A ∩Vk is measurable and has measure 0.
By Theorem C.4 applied to ψk with E = A ∩Vk,
Lebp
 ψk(A ∩Vk)

=
Z
A∩Vk
 det Dψk(y)
 dy = 0.
Therefore, each ϕ−1(A)∩Uk is null and because a countable union of null sets is null, it holds that:
Lebp
 ϕ−1(A)

= 0.
Theorem C.5 (Preservation of absolute continuity under one GD step). Consider the setup of The-
orem C.3. In particular, let ϕ : Rp →Rp be the one-step GD map from that theorem:
ϕ(θ) = θ −η ∇θLs,p(θ),
(33)
with stepsize η ∈(0, 1). Then, gradient-descent preserves absolute continuity: for every absolutely
continuous probability law µ on Rp, its image under ϕ remains absolutely continuous:
ϕ#µ ≪Lebp.
Therefore, the updated parameters θ′ := ϕ(θ) are absolutely continuous.
Proof. By Proposition B.3 and closure properties, Ls,p is C2, hence ϕ ∈C1 and is Borel-
measurable. From Theorem C.3 the critical set
C := {θ ∈Rp : det Dϕ(θ) = 0}
has Lebp-measure 0. Therefore, the hypothesis of Lemma C.6 holds, and we have the property:
Lebp(A) = 0
=⇒
Lebp
 ϕ−1(A)

= 0
for every measurable A ⊆Rp.
(†)
Let A be any Borel set with Lebp(A) = 0. Then
ϕ#µ(A) = µ
 ϕ−1(A)

= 0,
because µ ≪Lebp and Lebp
 ϕ−1(A)

= 0 by (†). Since this holds for every Lebp-null set A, we
conclude ϕ#µ ≪Lebp.
Corollary C.5.1 (Preservation of absolute continuity under finitely many GD steps). Fix a finite
vocabulary V, a context bound K ∈N, and the Transformer language model f of Definition B.13.
For t = 1, . . . , T, let (st, pt) ∈V≤K × ∆|V|−1 and ηt ∈(0, 1), and define the t-th GD update
ϕt(θ) = θ −ηt ∇θLst,pt(θ),
Lst,pt(θ) = CrossEntropy
 f(st ; θ), pt

.
Let the T-step update map be the composition
Φ := ϕT ◦· · · ◦ϕ1 : Rp →Rp.
Then, for every absolutely continuous probability law µ on Rp, its image under Φ remains absolutely
continuous:
Φ#µ ≪Lebp.
Equivalently, if θ(0) ∼µ with µ ≪Lebp and
θ(t+1) = ϕt
 θ(t)
,
t = 0, . . . , T −1,
then the T-step parameters θ(T ) = Φ
 θ(0)
are absolutely continuous.
Proof. Since the result of Lemma C.6 holds for each ϕt, for any null set A, repeated preimages
remain null:
Lebp
 (ϕT ◦· · · ◦ϕ1)−1(A)

= 0.
The same argument as in the proof of Theorem C.5 then yields the claim.
42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
D
LEFT-INVERTIBILITY VIA SIPIT
Goal.
We study when and how the hidden states of a causal decoder-only Transformer admit a left
inverse: given the layer-ℓrepresentation at position t and the true prefix π = s1:t−1, can we recover
the next token st?
Main idea.
Under mild randomness in the parameters and causal masking, the one-step last-token
map that sends a candidate token v to the layer-ℓrepresentation at position t (conditioning on π) is
almost-surely injective, and in fact has a positive separation margin. This yields a simple verifier:
declare v correct iff the observed hidden state lies in a small ball around F(v; π, t).
Algorithmic consequence.
Because causality localizes the dependence to (π, st), we can invert
an entire sequence sequentially with a single pass over the vocabulary per position. We call this
procedure SIPIT (Sequential Inverse Prompt via ITerative updates), and we show exact (and robust)
recovery holds almost surely, with worst-case time Θ(T|V|).
Standing conventions for this section.
Fix a layer index ℓ∈[L]. For any input sequence s =
⟨s1, . . . , sT ⟩, define the layer outputs row-wise by
H(0)(s) := Emb(s),
H(ℓ)(s) := TB(ℓ) H(ℓ−1)(s)

∈RT ×d,
and write ht(s) to denote the row of H(ℓ)(s) at position t. Furthermore, we use ⊕for sequence
concatenation: if s = ⟨s1, . . . , st−1⟩and v ∈V, then s ⊕v = ⟨s1, . . . , st−1, v⟩.
The parameters θ and target layer ℓare considered fixed and omitted for simplicity.
Assumption D.1 (Causal self-attention throughout). Every attention layer in every block is causal
in the sense of Definitions B.6 and B.7. Consequently, for any s and any t ∈[T],
ht(s) depends only on the prefix ⟨s1, . . . , st⟩.
(34)
Assumption D.2 (Injectivity Assumption). SIPIT is applied to models initialized with parameters
drawn from an absolutely continuous distribution and trained via (mini-batch) gradient descent with
step sizes in (0, 1), as described in Appendix C. Under these conditions, any network considered in
the sequel is almost-surely injective (Theorem C.1).
D.1
ONE-STEP LAST-TOKEN MAPS
We first isolate the positionwise map that drives inversion. Fix a position t and prefix π ∈Vt−1. The
one-step map F(·; π, t) sends a candidate token v to the layer-ℓhidden state at position t obtained
when the prefix is π and the token at t is v. Causality implies that ht depends only on (π, v) (not on
any future tokens), and we show that, for almost all parameter settings, F is injective with a strictly
positive pairwise margin over V.
Definition D.1 (One-step map at time t under prefix π). Let π ∈Vt−1 be a fixed prefix (possibly
t = 1, when π is empty). Define
F : V −→Rd,
F(v ; π, t) := ht(π ⊕v).
Remark 15. F is simply a function that returns the hidden output of token v at the ℓtransformer
block given that π is used a fixed prefix. This map allows us to have a convenient notation for
introducing results about inversion. Furthermore, since F is built using ℓtransformer blocks, it is
parameterized by θ. Nevertheless, for the sake of simplicity, we will refer to Fℓ,θ simply as F.
Once the One-step map (Definition D.1) is introduced, one can present its a.s. injectivity through
an application of the previously obtained result (Theorem C.1). Furthermore, one can deploy the
common prefix to introduce a stronger notion of injectivity: margin separation (Lemma D.1).
Theorem D.1 (A.s. one-step injectivity). Fix t and the prefix π ∈Vt−1. Under Assumptions D.1
and D.2, it holds that:
Pr

∃v ̸= v′ ∈V : F(v ; π, t) = F(v′ ; π, t)

= 0.
Equivalently, F is injective almost-surely.
43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Proof. Set the finite family St,π := {π ⊕v :
v ∈V} ⊆Vt and view ht(s) as the last-token
representation of the truncated Transformer consisting of the first ℓblocks. All assumptions used in
Corollary C.2.1 remain valid for this truncated model. Applying the corollary with S = St,π yields,
almost-surely, ht(π ⊕v) ̸= ht(π ⊕v′) whenever v ̸= v′. This is exactly the injectivity of F.
Lemma D.1 (Strict separation margin a.s.). Under the conditions of Theorem D.1, define the (data-
dependent) margin
∆π,t :=
min
v̸=v′∈V
F(v ; π, t) −F(v′ ; π, t)

2
Then,
Pr[∆π,t > 0] = 1.
Proof. By Theorem D.1, with probability 1 the set
{F(v ; π, t) : v ∈V}
consists of |V| distinct points in Rd. On this event of full probability, every pairwise distance among
these finitely many points is strictly positive, so their minimum is strictly positive as well.
Thus, the event {∆π,t > 0} coincides with the event that F is injective on V. Since injectivity holds
almost-surely by assumption, we conclude that Pr[∆π,t > 0] = 1.
D.2
THE CORE ROUTINES: LOCAL VERIFIERS, ACCEPTANCE REGIONS, AND POLICIES
Given F(· ; π, t), inversion reduces to a local hypothesis test: for an observed bht, which token’s
predicted representation is closest? We formalize this with acceptance regions–closed balls around
F(v ; π, t)–and a verifier that accepts v iff bht lies in its ball. Almost-sure injectivity yields unique-
ness at radius 0, and a positive margin yields uniqueness for any ε < ∆π,t/2. To explore candidates
efficiently, we couple the verifier with any policy that enumerates untried tokens (e.g., uniform with-
out replacement or a gradient-guided ranking).
Definition D.2 (Local verifier and acceptance tolerance). Given a tolerance ε ≥0, define the ac-
ceptance region for symbol v as the closed ball (Definition A.8):
Aπ,t(v ; ε) := B
 F(v ; π, t), ε

.
A candidate token v ∈V is verified for observation bht if and only if bht ∈Aπ,t(v ; ε).
Remark 16 (Decoding via acceptance regions). Given a prefix π ∈Vt−1 and the observation bht
at position t, we identify the next token by checking in which acceptance region bht lies: declare v
verified iff bht ∈Aπ,t(v; ε). By Lemma D.1, for any ε < ∆π,t/2 the regions {Aπ,t(v; ε)}v∈V are
pairwise disjoint; hence there is at most one verified token (and in the noiseless case ε = 0, exactly
one).
Building on the intuition in Remark 16, we introduce two radii to define acceptance regions that
avoid collisions:
Proposition D.1 (Probabilistic soundness and uniqueness of the local verifier). Fix position t and
prefix π ∈Vt−1. Under Assumptions D.1 and D.2, for all v⋆∈V, the following hold with probabil-
ity one:
1. Noiseless soundness. If ε = 0 and bht = F(v⋆; π, t), then v⋆is the unique verified symbol.
2. Robust uniqueness. If ε < ∆π,t/2 and bht ∈Aπ,t(v∗; ε), then v⋆is the unique verified symbol.
Proof. Recall that under Assumptions D.1 and D.2, F is injective and ∆π,t > 0 almost-surely.
(1) Noiseless soundness. For any v ∈V, Aπ,t(v ; 0) = {F(v ; π, t)}. If bht = F(v⋆; π, t) and some
v ̸= v⋆were also verified at ε = 0, we would have F(v ; π, t) = F(v⋆; π, t), which is a probability
zero event under the assumptions made. Hence v⋆is uniquely verified almost-surely.
44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
(2) Robust uniqueness. Assume ε < ∆π,t/2 and ∥bht −F(v⋆; π, t)∥2 < ε. If some v ̸= v⋆were also
verified, then ∥bht −F(v ; π, t)∥2 ≤ε. By the triangle inequality,
F(v ; π, t) −F(v⋆; π, t)

2 ≤
bht −F(v ; π, t)

2 +
bht −F(v⋆; π, t)

2 < 2ε < ∆π,t,
contradicting the definition of ∆π,t (again, valid under the assumptions made). Thus v⋆is uniquely
verified almost-surely.
Candidate enumeration.
Finally, we introduce the last conceptual block required to build the
inversion algorithm: a policy algorithm that systematically enumerates candidate tokens so that the
verifier is guaranteed to encounter the true one.
Definition D.3 (Policy algorithm). Let V be a finite vocabulary. A policy algorithm is a (possibly
randomized) map
Π : { C ⊊V } −→V
such that
Π(C) ∈V \ C for all C ⊊V.
(When C = V the map is undefined.)
Remark 17 (Enumeration property). Intuitively, a policy chooses any token not tried yet. Starting
from C0 = ∅and iterating
vi := Π(Ci−1),
Ci := Ci−1 ∪{vi}
(i = 1, . . . , |V|),
produces a sequence (v1, . . . , v|V|) that is a (possibly random) permutation of V. Thus, in exactly
|V| steps, every token is output once with no repetitions.
Two examples of policy algorithms.
We give (i) a uniform-random without replacement policy
and (ii) a gradient-guided policy.
Algorithm 2 Policy (Random)
Require: Vocabulary V; visited set C; embedding matrix E ∈R|V|×d
Ensure: Next token ID and embedding
1: Sample a permutation L = (v1, . . . , v|V|) uniformly from V
2: Define ρ(v ; π) as the rank of v in L
3: v⋆= arg minv∈V\C ρ(v ; π)
4: return v⋆, Ev⋆
Algorithm 3 Policy (Gradient-based)
Require: Vocabulary V; visited set C; embedding matrix E ∈R|V|×d ; prefix π ∈Vt−1; layer ℓ;
previous continuous embedding e(j−1) ; step size γ > 0; gradient-based update rule G
Ensure: Next token ID and embedding
1: g ←∇e(j−1) 1
2
F
 e(j−1) ; π, t

−bht

2
2
2: e(j) ←G(e(j−1), g, γ)
3: Get L = (v1, . . . , v|V|) by ordering vi based on ℓ2(Evi, e(j))
4: Define ρ(v ; π) as the rank of v in L
5: v⋆= arg minv∈V\C ρ(v ; π)
6: return v⋆, e(j)
Remark 18 (Bypassing the embedding layer). We slightly overload notation and write F(e; π, t).
Here we bypass the token embedding lookup and inject a continuous vector at the current position:
the first t−1 rows of H(0) are set to Emb(π) and the t-th row is set to e. This extension is used only to
guide the search (e.g., in Policy-Gradient). All theoretical guarantees are stated for F(v; π, t) with
v ∈V and are unaffected by allowing F to accept a continuous proxy during candidate scoring.
Any extra inputs/side outputs used by a policy (such as the updated proxy) are orthogonal to the
correctness statements.
45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Remark 19 (Practical choice of policy). Both Algorithms 2 and 3 satisfy Definition D.3. In practice
we use the gradient-guided policy with standard gradient descent updates, as it tends to find the
verified token with far fewer proposals: the next token is chosen by ranking V by the distance
∥Ev −e(j)∥2 to the updated proxy e(j). This preserves the same worst-case guarantees (single pass
over V) while improving empirical efficiency.
D.3
GLOBAL INVERSION VIA SIPIT
We now compose the local verifier into a sequential decoder. At step t, causality ensures ht(s) =
F(st; π, t) for the true prefix π = s1:t−1. Since the verifier uniquely accepts st (noiselessly, and
robustly under perturbations below half the margin), any covering policy must encounter and accept
the true token within a single pass over V. Iterating from t = 1 to T yields exact recovery almost
surely; we also quantify robustness and the worst-case runtime.
We are now ready to introduce our inversion algorithm: SIPIT (Algorithm 1). The algorithms applies
to decoder-only transformers with causal self-attention (Assumption D.1), and assumes injectivity,
which occurs with almost-surely (Assumption D.2). We assume access to the layer-ℓhidden states
per position
n
bht
oT
t=1 and to the parameters needed to evaluate the local verifier from Definition D.2
for arbitrary (t, π, j), as well as the gradient (when needed), namely to the model up to layer ℓ. A
policy algorithm is fixed (e.g., Algorithm 3).
We begin by recording the following standard lemma and omitting the proof, as it is immediate from
causal masking: under causal self-attention, the representation at position t is independent of future
tokens.
Lemma D.2 (Causal factorization and prefixwise identifiability). Under Assumptions D.1 and D.2,
fix position t ∈[T]. For any s = ⟨s1, . . . , sT ⟩with π = ⟨s1, . . . , st−1⟩,
ht(s) = F(st ; π, t),
where F is the one-step map from Definition D.1.
Proof. With causal masking, position t attends only to positions ≤t. Evaluating the network up to
layer ℓtherefore yields a representation at t that is a function of the prefix π and the current token st
only, i.e. F(st ; π, t), as claimed.
Proposition D.2 (The verifier is the right primitive). Fix t and a true prefix π = ⟨s1, . . . , st−1⟩. Un-
der Assumption D.1, the observed hidden state at step t satisfies ht(s) = F(st ; π, t) (Lemma D.2).
In addition, under Assumption D.2, F is injective and has positive margin ∆π,t > 0 almost-surely
(Theorem D.1 and lemma D.1). Consequently, for the local verifier of Definition D.2, the following
hold with probability one:
1. (Noiseless) With ε = 0 and observation bht = ht(s), the unique verified token is st.
2. (Robust) If bht = ht(s) + et with ∥et∥2 < ε < ∆π,t/2, then st is the unique verified token.
Proof. Immediate from Lemma D.2 and Proposition D.1 applied with v⋆= st, which holds almost-
surely by Theorem D.1 and Lemma D.1.
Proposition D.3 (Eventual acceptance under increasing enumeration). Fix a position t and the true
prefix π = ⟨s1, . . . , st−1⟩. Under Assumption D.1 and Assumption D.2, let ε ≥0 and work on
the probability-one event where the local verifier uniquely accepts the true token st (e.g., ε = 0 or
ε < ∆π,t/2; see Proposition D.2).
Let Π be any policy algorithm (Definition D.3). Define the increasing visited sets by C0 = ∅,
vi := Π(Ci−1), and Ci := Ci−1 ∪{vi} for i ≥1, and stop at the first index
τ := min

i ≥1 : bht ∈Aπ,t(vi ; ε)
	
.
Then (vi)i≥1 enumerates V without replacement and τ ≤|V| almost surely. In particular, for the
fixed prefix π, the policy’s increasingly expanding search over V eventually proposes the unique
verified token st and accepts it with probability 1.
46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Proof. Work on the probability-one event of Proposition D.2 (under Assumptions D.1 and D.2 with
the stated ε), on which the local verifier at step t uniquely accepts the true token st. Equivalently,
bht ∈Aπ,t(v ; ε) ⇐⇒v = st.
(35)
Enumeration without replacement.
By the definition of a policy algorithm (Definition D.3),
vi = Π(Ci−1) ∈V \ Ci−1 and Ci = Ci−1 ∪{vi}. Hence vi /∈Ci−1 and |Ci| = |Ci−1| + 1. Inducting
on i yields that (vi)i≥1 has no repetitions and Ci contains exactly i distinct tokens. Since V is finite,
after |V| steps we have C|V| = V, i.e., (vi)|V|
i=1 is a permutation of V (this holds pathwise, for any
realization of the policy’s internal randomness).
Eventual acceptance.
Because (vi) is a permutation of V, there exists a unique index j ∈
{1, . . . , |V|} with vj = st. By equation 35,
τ = min{ i ≥1 : bht ∈Aπ,t(vi ; ε) } = min{ i ≥1 : vi = st } = j,
so τ ≤|V| and the process accepts st.
Since the event on which equation 35 holds has probability 1, the conclusion (eventual acceptance
at finite τ) holds almost surely.
Theorem D.2 (Correctness of SIPIT (noiseless & robust)). For each t ∈{1, . . . , T} let πt =
⟨s1, . . . , st−1⟩and let ∆πt,t > 0 be the margin of the one-step map F(·; πt, t) from Lemma D.1.
Under Assumptions D.1 and D.2, run SIPIT (Algorithm 1) with a tolerance ε ≥0 and observations
bht = ht(s) + et
(t = 1, . . . , T),
where the perturbations satisfy ∥et∥2 ≤ε for all t and
ε <
1
2 ∆πt,t
for all t.
Then, with probability 1 over the model parameters: (i) for every t, the inner for-loop over j (the
loop over vocabulary candidates) terminates within |V| iterations by accepting the true token st;
and (ii) after the outer for-loop over t (the loop over positions) finishes, the algorithm outputs the
exact sequence bs = s.
In particular, this covers the noiseless case by taking ε = 0 and bht = ht(s), and the robust case
with any uniform ε such that maxt ∥et∥2 ≤ε < 1
2 mint ∆πt,t.
Proof. By Assumption D.2 and theorem D.1, and Lemma D.1, there is a probability-one event on
which, for all t, F(·; πt, t) is injective with strictly positive margin ∆πt,t. Intersecting across finitely
many t preserves probability 1. Work on this event.
By Assumption D.1 and lemma D.2, ht(s) = F(st; πt, t). Since ∥et∥2 ≤ε,
bht = F(st; πt, t) + et ∈B
 F(st; πt, t), ε

= Aπt,t(st; ε),
so the local verifier accepts st. Moreover, because ε < 1
2∆πt,t, Proposition D.1(2) implies robust
uniqueness:
bht ∈Aπt,t(v; ε)
⇐⇒
v = st.
(36)
When ε = 0, equation 36 also holds by Proposition D.1(1). We now analyze SIPIT and proceed by
induction on t.
Base case (t = 1). The outer for-loop over t begins with bs = ⟨⟩= π1. Inside the inner for-
loop over j (the loop over vocabulary candidates), the policy (Definition D.3) enumerates V without
replacement. By Proposition D.3, there exists j⋆≤|V| such that vj⋆= s1, which is accepted and
triggers the break; the algorithm appends s1.
Inductive step. Suppose after completing the inner loop at step t −1 the algorithm has appended
st−1, so the prefix entering step t isbs = πt. By equation 36, within the inner loop the verifier accepts
exactly when vj = st. Because the policy enumerates V without replacement, some j ≤|V| satisfies
vj = st, which is accepted, appended, and the inner loop breaks.
Thus for every t, the inner loop terminates by accepting st within |V| iterations, and after the outer
loop finishes we have appended (s1, . . . , sT ), i.e., bs = s. Since the reasoning holds on a probability-
one event (independent of the policy’s internal randomness), the conclusion is almost sure.
47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Termination and complexity.
Having established correctness, we record the worst-case iteration
count and discuss its relation to wall-clock time.
Proposition D.4 (Termination and linear step bound). Run SIPIT (Algorithm 1) on a length-T se-
quence with any policy that enumerates V without replacement. Then the algorithm halts after a
finite number of iterations. Moreover, in the worst case the inner for-loop over j executes at most
|V| iterations at each position t, so the total number of verifier tests across the entire run is at most
T |V|. In particular, the number of loop iterations grows linearly with T · |V|.
Proof. Fix a position t. The inner for-loop over j proposes unvisited tokens and stops when a
candidate verifies, or after exhausting V. Because the policy enumerates without replacement, the
loop can execute at most |V| iterations at step t. The outer for-loop over t runs for exactly T
positions, hence the total number of inner-loop iterations (i.e., verifier tests) is at most PT
t=1 |V| =
T|V| < ∞. Therefore the algorithm halts and the total number of tests is linear in T · |V|.
Remark 20 (Iterations vs. wall–clock time). Proposition D.4 bounds the number of iterations/tests:
the inner loop performs at most |V| verifier tests per position, so the total is Θ(T|V|). This is an
iteration complexity statement that holds for any policy satisfying the “enumerate V without replace-
ment” property. Actual wall–clock time also depends on the per–test cost (one call to F(v; π, t) plus
a distance) and on any policy overhead (e.g., forward/backward proxy updates, scoring, sorting). A
generic decomposition is
time = Θ
 T|V| · Ctest

+
T
X
t=1
Cpolicy(t),
where Ctest is the cost of one membership test and Cpolicy(t) captures policy-specific work at step
t. Thus, if |V| is treated as fixed and Ctest, Cpolicy(t) are bounded (e.g., a constant number of proxy
updates and at most one ranking per update), wall–clock time is O(T). If |V| grows or the policy
sorts per update, additional factors like |V| or log |V| may appear in the time, but the termination
and the Θ(T|V|) iteration bound remain unchanged.
Remark 21 (Choosing the tolerance ε). Theory guarantees uniqueness whenever ε <
1
2∆π,t
(Proposition D.1). Since ∆π,t is unknown, two practical choices work well: (i) backoff: start with
a small ε and increase only if no token verifies; (ii) calibration: set ε from held-out hidden states at
layer ℓ. In all cases the decision rule remains a simple yes/no membership test.
Remark 22 (Why SIPIT is sequential). The algorithm never solves a global assignment. At position
t it conditions on the current prefix π and queries the local verifier for a single token. Causality
(Assumption D.1) ensures ht depends only on (π, st), so these local, prefixwise decisions compose
to recover the full sequence.
E
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS AND ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
This section collects implementation details (§E.1), additional ablations on collision experiments
and SIPIT (§E.2), controlled experiments with identical next-token predictions (§E.3), qualitative
inspection of the closest hidden-state pairs (§E.4), and connections to anisotropy and intrinsic di-
mension (§E.5).
E.1
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
What is a collision in practice.
In the theoretical parts of the paper we use “collision” in the usual
functional sense: two distinct prompts s ̸= s′ such that their last-token representations coincide
exactly,
r(s ; θT ) = r(s′ ; θT ).
This is the event whose probability is controlled in theorems 2.2 and 2.3 and in Section C, and all
proofs are carried out at the level of exact equality (no numerical threshold is required).
In the experiments, however, representations are stored in floating-point format, so exact equality of
r(s ; θT ) and r(s′ ; θT ) may not be a meaningful or robust criterion. We therefore adopt a numer-
ical proxy: given two prompts s, s′ and their embeddings r(s ; θT ), r(s′ ; θT ) ∈Rd, we declare a
48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
practical collision only if
torch.allclose
 r(s ; θT ), r(s′ ; θT )

= True,
i.e., every coordinate falls within PyTorch’s prescribed tolerances, namely 10−5 and 10−8 for rele-
vant and absolute tolerance respectively. Across all of the billions to trillions of empirical checks,
every pair of distinct prompts s ̸= s′ failed this criterion: torch.allclose always returned
False, and the observed ℓ2 distances were consistently bounded away from zero. Thus, at the
resolution of our numerical precision, we did not observe any collisions in practice.
SIPIT implementation.
We implement SIPIT exactly as in Alg. 1 with the gradient-guided policy.
To stabilize the continuous proxy used for ranking, we apply gradient clipping (capping the gradient
norm at 1) and we periodically project it back to the nearest token embedding every K =50 candidate
proposals:
e(j) ←Ev†,
v† = arg min
v∈V\C
Ev −e(j)
2,
without taking gradients through this projection. These heuristics affect efficiency only; the verifier
and all correctness guarantees remain unchanged.
HARDPROMPTS implementation.
The original HARDPROMPTS method Wen et al. (2023) tar-
gets multimodal vision-language models and optimizes prompts via a CLIP-based similarity objec-
tive. In our text-only setting we lack the vision branch and CLIP loss, so we adapt Algorithm 1
of Wen et al. (2023) to language models by replacing the objective with the same ℓ2 loss used in
SIPIT’s gradient calculation, and setting the optimization steps T = 1
4# tokens·|V|. All other details
(step sizes, stopping rules) mirror our SIPIT setup to ensure a fair comparison.
10−4
10−1
102
L2 Distance
Collision threshold
gpt2
10−4
10−1
102
L2 Distance
Collision threshold
gpt2-medium
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
Layer
10−4
10−1
102
L2 Distance
Collision threshold
gpt2-large
Figure 7: Seeking collisions in a large-scale prompt set (§4.1). For each layer, boxplots show
the distribution (log scale) of the minimum pairwise ℓ2 distances between last-token states across
prompts for the GPT-2 model family (Small, Medium, and Large); red bars mark medians and
the dashed line indicates the collision threshold 10−6.
49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
E.2
ADDITIONAL ABLATIONS
E.2.1
COLLISION EXPERIMENTS
We report three complementary ablations that probe how separation behaves across depth, length,
and model family.
GPT-2 family across depth. For GPT-2 Small, GPT-2 Medium, and GPT-2 Large, the
per-layer boxplots (log scale) of the minimum pairwise ℓ2 distances between last-token states in
Figure 7 show that all minima sit orders of magnitude above the collision threshold 10−6 at every
depth, and the typical separation increases with depth (median red bars drift upward). This rules out
collisions in practice and indicates that deeper blocks monotonically sharpen last-token distinctions
in these models.
0
100
200
300
400
500
Sequence length
103
104
L2 Distance
mean
min
max
Figure 9: Sequence length versus distance over all
pairs of distinct prompts for Gemma-1B.
Gemma-3 family across depth and scale.
Across
Gemma3-1B,
Gemma3-4B,
and
Gemma3-12B, the layerwise boxplots (log
scale) in Figure 8 again show minima far above
10−6 at all depths. Both depth and model size
trend positively with separation: medians and
lower whiskers move upward in deeper layers
and larger models, indicating progressively
stronger margins and no observed collisions.
Effect of sequence length (Gemma-1B).
Varying
the
prompt
length
reveals
that
min/mean/max pairwise distances rise quickly
for short sequences and then plateau, with the
minimum never approaching zero (see Fig-
ure 9). This suggests that beyond a modest context size, additional tokens do not erode separability;
margins stabilize rather than collapse, making collisions unlikely for any prompt length explored.
10−3
101
105
L2 Distance
Collision threshold
gemma-3-1b-pt
10−3
101
105
L2 Distance
Collision threshold
gemma-3-4b-pt
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48
Layer
10−3
101
105
L2 Distance
Collision threshold
gemma-3-12b-pt
Figure 8: Seeking collisions in a large-scale prompt set (§4.1). For each layer, boxplots (log scale)
show the distribution of minimum pairwise ℓ2 distances between last-token states across prompts for
the Gemma-3 model family (1B, 4B, 12B); red bars denote medians and the dashed line marks the
collision threshold 10−6.
50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Overall, these ablations corroborate the main text: last-token states remain well-separated across
architectures and depths, separation typically grows with depth (and scale for Gemma), and margins
stabilize with sequence length, aligning with our almost-sure injectivity guarantees and with SIPIT’s
exact recovery behavior.
E.2.2
SIPIT
Model
Vocab size
Inversion performance
Accuracy
Time (s)
Vocab explored (%)
Mistral-7B-v0.1
32000
100%
72.99 ± 37.57
0.21 ± 0.11 %
Llama-3.1-8B
128255
100%
345.35 ± 181.30
0.22 ± 0.12 %
Table 6: Performance of SIPIT on different vocabulary sizes
Vocabulary Size.
To further validate our findings (as presented in Section 4) regarding the scaling
of SIPIT with vocabulary size, we conducted additional experiments on the two models with substan-
tially different vocabulary sizes, Mistral-7B-v0.1 (≈32K vocabulary) and Llama-3.1-8B
(≈128K). For a fair comparison, we construct sentences that tokenize to exactly the same se-
quence of tokens across both models. The results are reported in the Table 6. We observe that, in
practice, the inversion time grows linearly with vocabulary size, as expected, reflected by the nearly
constant percentage of tokens explored between the small-vocabulary model (Mistral) and the
larger-vocabulary model (Llama). Importantly, for both models, the fraction of tokens explored re-
mains below 0.25%, indicating that the gradient-based heuristic is both robust and highly efficient.
Dataset
Inversion Time (s)
Accuracy
Train Data
146.48 ± 91.52
100%
Test Data
128.62 ± 83.40
100%
OOD
106.87 ± 39.10
100%
Table 7: Performance of SIPIT on in-distribution vs. out-of-distribution data
Robustness of SIPIT on unseen and random sequences.
Based on GPT-2, we constructed three
datasets, which we refer to as Train, Test, and OOD (Out-of-Distribution). The Train set is formed
by sampling sentences from WebText (the dataset used to train GPT-2 Radford et al. (2019)); the
Test set contains sentences sampled from Wikipedia (not in the training set); and the OOD set con-
sists of random token sequences. Each dataset contains 50 prompts of length 100 tokens. We report
the findings in Table 7. Interestingly, the OOD samples are significantly faster to invert than the
Train and Test samples. We hypothesize that this difference stems from the geometry of the hidden
representations: natural language sentences (Train and Test) tend to lie on a structured, clustered
manifold, which can make the inversion landscape locally flatter and less well-conditioned. In con-
trast, random token sequences produce more dispersed and isolated hidden states, yielding clearer
descent directions and effectively stronger gradient signals, which accelerates convergence. Across
all three datasets, we obtain exact recovery for every sequence, further supporting the theoretical
guarantees of SIPIT.
E.3
IDENTICAL NEXT-TOKEN
The collision and ablation experiments above use generic prompt sets. A natural stress test is to
ask: what happens when we deliberately construct prompt pairs that produce the same next-token
prediction? To answer this question we designed a set of new experiments where two different
prompt are specifically constructed to yield the exact same target answer. First, we focused on word-
to-word machine translation (google/smol) and math tasks (ProCreations/SimpleMath)
51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Model
ℓ2 Distance (min)
layer 1
layer L/2
layer L
Llama-3.1-8B
0.694
1.632
4.202
Mistral-7B-v0.1
0.207
1.056
2.348
Phi-4-mini-instruct
4.375
6.974
17.328
Table 8:
Distances for Translation (En–Fr)
separator-token embeddings across layers.
Model
ℓ2 Distance (min)
layer 1
layer L/2
layer L
Llama-3.1-8B
0.789
2.126
8.245
Mistral-7B-v0.1
0.222
1.664
4.362
Phi-4-mini-instruct
4.447
8.497
37.262
Table 9: Distances for Math separator-token
embeddings across layers.
on Llama-3.1-8B, Mistral-7B, and Phi-4-mini-instruct. From these datasets, we
built few shot prompts that differed only in their delimiters (e.g. -> vs :) while preserving identical
translations or arithmetic solutions. Some qualitative examples are shown below:
Delimiter: ->
Translate into French.
Hello -> Bonjour
Goodbye -> Au revoir
House ->
Delimiter: :
Translate into French.
Hello : Bonjour
Goodbye : Au revoir
House :
Delimiter: ->
Do the additions.
2790 + 6698 -> 9488
8262 + 3848 -> 12110
1628 + 132 ->
Delimiter: =
Do the additions.
2790 + 6698 = 9488
8262 + 3848 = 12110
1628 + 132 =
We then assessed collisions involving four different separator token embeddings across all dataset
pairs, specifically ->, :, =, and -. Despite producing the exact same answer the corresponding
embeddings remain clearly distinct (no “collision”) since the minimum ℓ2 distance is well above the
collision threshold over the ≈140K possible pairs, as seen in tables 8 and 9.
Furthermore, we constructed a dataset of random prefixes sampled from internet text, each
followed by the fixed suffix “Complete this:
The quick brown fox jumps over
the lazy”. To build the dataset, we sampled 10K prefix sequences of length 50 tokens from
Wikipedia and appended the tokenized suffix to each. The minimum ℓ2 distances obtained are re-
ported in Table 10. Even in this setting, although the next token prediction is exactly “dog”, all
last-token embeddings remain far above the tolerance threshold.
Model
ℓ2 Distance (min)
layer 1
layer L/2
layer L
Mistral-7B-v0.1
0.012
0.265
3.494
Llama-3.1-8B
0.046
0.733
6.227
Phi-4-mini-instruct
0.087
2.302
18.913
Table 10: Distances for random-prefix dataset with fixed “quick brown fox” suffix.
E.4
PROMPTS WITH SIMILAR REPRESENTATIONS
To complement the quantitative injectivity results in the main text, we inspected qualitative examples
of sequences whose last-token hidden states are among the closest we observed. For a given model,
52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
we computed the Euclidean distance between last-layer representations hL(s) and hL(t) of the final
token in two sequences s and t, and manually examined pairs with the smallest ℓ2 distances.
For both Llama-3.1-8B and Mistral-7B-v0.1, the closest pairs correspond to Python code
snippets that are almost identical, typically differing only by a small shift such as one or more trailing
newline tokens. In most of the close pairs we examined, the two sequences satisfy
s = t ◦⟨new line token⟩k
for some small k ≥1. Even in these extremal cases, however, the last-token representations remain
clearly separated in ℓ2 distance.
Llama-3.1-8B.
One of the closest pairs we found for Llama-3.1-8B is shown below. The only
difference between the two sequences is the presence of several trailing newline characters at the
end of the second snippet. The last-token ℓ2 distance at the final layer for this pair is 1.274, which
is small relative to typical distances but still far from zero, and thus consistent with the absence of
collisions observed in our exhaustive tests.
Llama-3.1-8B: Sequence s
...
# Theme options are theme-specific and customize the ...
#html_theme_options = {}
# Add any paths that contain custom themes here ...
#html
Llama-3.1-8B: Sequence t
...
# Theme options are theme-specific and customize the ...
#html_theme_options = {}
# Add any paths that contain custom themes here ...
#html
\n
\n
\n
Mistral-7B-v0.1.
A similar phenomenon occurs for Mistral-7B-v0.1. Again, one of the
closest pairs consists of two almost identical code snippets, where the second sequence appends
a single newline token: For this pair, the last-token ℓ2 distance at the last layer is 1.146. As in
the Llama example, the nearest neighbors arise from almost identical contexts differing only in
trailing whitespace tokens, and even these extremal cases exhibit a non-negligible separation in
representation space.
Mistral-7B-v0.1: Sequence s
...
# The reST default role to use for all documents.
#default_role = None
# If true, ’()’ will be appended to :func: ...
#add_function_parentheses = True
# If true, the current module ...
53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Mistral-7B-v0.1: Sequence t
# The reST default role to use for all documents.
#default_role = None
# If true, ’()’ will be appended to :func: ...
#add_function_parentheses = True
# If true, the current module ...
\n
Summary.
Across all models and pairs we inspected, we did not observe qualitatively different
prompts whose last-layer, last-token embeddings were comparably close. Instead, the nearest neigh-
bors consistently involved near-duplicate snippets (often code or documentation) differing only by
whitespace or other minor formatting tokens. These qualitative observations align with the injectiv-
ity margins reported in the main text and support the view that small perturbations in formatting do
not lead to collisions in the representations used by SIPIT.
E.5
RELATION WITH ANISOTROPY AND INTRINSIC DIMENSION
As part of our broader investigation, we also examined connections to the analyses presented in
the works of Razzhigaev et al. (2025) (LLM-Microscope) and Razzhigaev et al. (2024), and ran a
targeted experiment in this spirit.
Experimental setup.
We performed a proof-of-concept study using GPT-2 Small. We sampled
100 natural-language prompts of fixed length K and, for each prompt, generated 1000 single-token
continuations by appending each token from a fixed vocabulary subset of size 1000. For every layer
ℓ, we extracted the hidden representation of the last token for all 1000 continuations, producing a
1000×d matrix for each (layer, prompt) pair. On each matrix we computed (i) anisotropy and intrin-
sic dimension as in LLM-Microscope, and (ii) simple “injectivity margin” statistics: the minimum
pairwise Euclidean distance between continuation embeddings, averaged over prompts. Aggregat-
ing over the 100 prompts yields, for each layer, a triple consisting of anisotropy, intrinsic dimension,
and injectivity margin.
Experiment 1: anisotropy vs. injectivity margin.
Across layers, we correlated mean anisotropy
with the mean injectivity margin. The resulting Pearson correlation is 0.72, and the Spearman corre-
Layer
Anisotropy (mean)
ID (mean)
Margin (min)
1
0.089579
20.754620
1.850306
2
0.076049
17.565538
1.956753
3
0.071429
16.765265
2.064488
4
0.075067
16.679382
2.241199
5
0.083282
17.183246
2.382355
6
0.089542
17.697870
2.499817
7
0.088463
17.018419
2.704958
8
0.083261
16.296431
2.886434
9
0.081803
16.040713
3.025268
10
0.083083
15.730601
3.330774
11
0.090206
15.635035
3.918343
12
0.288352
16.434897
4.640457
Table 11: Layer-wise anisotropy, intrinsic dimension, and injectivity margin.
54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
lation is 0.45. In this setting, layers with higher anisotropy tend to exhibit larger injectivity margins:
continuation clouds become both more structured (anisotropic) and farther from collisions. This
suggests that anisotropy is compatible with, and may even reinforce, numerically robust injectivity.
Experiment 2: intrinsic dimension vs. injectivity margin.
Repeating the analysis with intrinsic
dimension, we observe a Pearson correlation of -0.60 and a Spearman correlation of -0.79 between
intrinsic dimension and injectivity margin. Thus, layers with lower intrinsic dimensionality tend to
have larger margins: compressed-looking manifolds are, if anything, more separated. This aligns
with our theorem that injectivity rules out information-destroying collapses.
Discussion.
This line of analysis is highly complementary to our injectivity framework. Whereas
our results establish that internal representations are almost surely lossless, LLM-Microscope offers
fine-grained geometric diagnostics of how these representations evolve across depth and training.
Particularly notable is the observation that anisotropy and intrinsic dimension follow a reverse-U
profile: representations become more anisotropic and lower-dimensional in intermediate layers, then
partially re-expand near the output, offering a concrete geometric picture of how structure is carved
into aligned directions and low-dimensional manifolds.
This is especially relevant given that our paper challenges classic accounts of learning via bottleneck
compression (e.g. Shwartz-Ziv & Tishby (2017)). If information is preserved along the residual
stream, learning cannot proceed layer by layer purely through compression. Our preliminary exper-
iments suggest a different picture: as depth increases, margins grow, intrinsic dimension decreases,
and anisotropy follows a concave trajectory with a late spike. Early layers expand and reorganize,
intermediate layers carve information into low-dimensional directional manifolds, and upper layers
sharpen this structure. Overall, this is consistent with a network that preserves injectivity while
funneling information into increasingly structured, well-separated representations.
Model (HF example)
Activation in FFN
Real-analytic?
Llama-2
SwiGLU
Yes
Llama-3
SwiGLU
Yes
Mistral-7B-v0.1
SiLU
Yes
Mixtral-8x7B-v0.1
SiLU
Yes
Gemma
GeGLU
Yes
Gemma-2
GELU
Yes
Qwen2MoE
SwiGLU
Yes
Qwen-2
SiLU
Yes
Qwen3MoE
SiLU
Yes
Qwen-3
SiLU
Yes
Phi
GELU
Yes
Phi-3
SiLU
Yes
GPT-2
GELU
Yes
GPT-J
GELU
Yes
GptOss
SiLU
Yes
Grok-1
GELU
Yes
DeepSeek-V2
SiLU
Yes
DeepSeek-V3
SiLU
Yes
Table 12: Activation functions used in the feed-forward networks of representative modern LLMs.
55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
F
REAL-ANALYTIC ACTIVATION FUNCTIONS IN MODERN LLMS
A natural question raised by our analysis is to what extent modern large language models actually
use real-analytic activation functions in their feed-forward networks. Since our results apply most
directly when the non-linearities are real-analytic, it is important to check whether this assumption
holds in practice.
To get a concrete picture, we surveyed a set of widely used open-source and proprietary-style ar-
chitectures and recorded the activation function used in their feed-forward blocks. The models and
their reported activations are summarized in Table 12. For each model, we also indicate whether the
activation is real-analytic. Activations such as SiLU/Swish, SwiGLU, GeGLU, and GELU are all
real-analytic, being compositions and products of elementary analytic functions (e.g., linear maps,
exponentials, and the error function).
Across this representative sample, we find that all models (18 out of 18) use real-analytic activations
in their feed-forward blocks. In other words, the analyticity assumption is not merely a technical
convenience but accurately reflects common design practice. This supports the relevance of our
theoretical results for real-world large language models: the vast majority of modern transformers
already operate in a regime where the non-linearities are real-analytic, and hence fall directly within
the scope of our analysis. We now formally prove that SiLU and GELU are real-analytic scalar
functions, and that the corresponding gated constructions SwiGLU and GeGLU define real-analytic
vector-valued maps.
The proofs build from elementary ingredients upward: sigmoid (Proposi-
tion F.1) →SiLU (Proposition F.2); error function (Proposition F.3) →GELU (Proposition F.4);
then coordinatewise lifting (Proposition F.5) and GLU gating (Proposition F.6).
Proposition F.1 (Logistic sigmoid is real-analytic). The logistic sigmoid
σ(x) :=
1
1 + e−x ,
x ∈R,
is real-analytic on R.
Proof. By Proposition A.5, the map x 7→e−x is real-analytic on R. By Proposition A.1, the sum
x 7→1 + e−x is real-analytic; moreover 1 + e−x > 0 for all x ∈R, so it never vanishes. By the
quotient rule in Proposition A.1, the reciprocal
x 7→
1
1 + e−x
is therefore real-analytic on R.
Proposition F.2 (SiLU / Swish is real-analytic). The SiLU (or Swish) activation
SiLU(x) := x σ(x) =
x
1 + e−x ,
x ∈R,
is real-analytic on R.
Proof. The identity map x 7→x is a polynomial, hence real-analytic by Proposition A.4. By Propo-
sition F.1, σ is real-analytic. The product of two real-analytic functions is real-analytic by Proposi-
tion A.1, so x 7→x σ(x) is real-analytic on R.
Proposition F.3 (Error function is real-analytic). The error function
erf(x) :=
2
√π
Z x
0
e−t2 dt,
x ∈R,
is real-analytic on R.
Proof. By Proposition A.5, exp is real-analytic on R with power series ez = P∞
k=0
zk
k! and infinite
radius of convergence. Substituting z = −t2 yields
e−t2 =
∞
X
k=0
(−1)k
k!
t2k,
t ∈R.
56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
This series has infinite radius of convergence, so it converges uniformly on every bounded interval.
By standard results on termwise integration of power series (e.g. Rudin 1976), we may integrate
termwise:
Z x
0
e−t2 dt =
∞
X
k=0
(−1)k
k!
Z x
0
t2k dt =
∞
X
k=0
(−1)k
k!(2k + 1) x2k+1.
Multiplying by 2/√π we obtain
erf(x) =
2
√π
∞
X
k=0
(−1)k
k!(2k + 1) x2k+1,
a power series with infinite radius of convergence. Hence erf is real-analytic on R by Definition A.1.
Proposition F.4 (GELU is real-analytic). Let
Φ(x) := 1
2

1 + erf
  x
√
2

be the CDF of a standard normal random variable. The (exact) GELU activation
GELU(x) := x Φ(x)
is real-analytic on R.
Proof. By Proposition F.3, erf is real-analytic. The map x 7→
x
√
2 is linear, hence real-analytic;
by Proposition A.2, the composition x 7→erf
  x
√
2

is real-analytic. Adding the constant 1 and
scaling by 1
2 preserves real-analyticity by Proposition A.1, so Φ is real-analytic. The identity map
x 7→x is a polynomial (Proposition A.4), hence real-analytic; their product x 7→x Φ(x) is therefore
real-analytic by Proposition A.1.
Having established that SiLU and GELU are real-analytic as scalar functions, we now lift them to
the vector-valued setting and show that the GLU-style gating used in modern architectures preserves
real-analyticity.
Proposition F.5 (Vector-valued SiLU and GELU are real-analytic). Let m ∈N. Define the coordi-
natewise maps
SiLUm(x) :=
 SiLU(x1), . . . , SiLU(xm)
⊤,
GELUm(x) :=
 GELU(x1), . . . , GELU(xm)
⊤,
for x ∈Rm, where SiLU and GELU are as in Proposition F.2 and Proposition F.4. Then both
SiLUm and GELUm are real-analytic maps Rm →Rm.
Proof. Each scalar component x 7→SiLU(xi) (resp. GELU(xi)) is the composition of the projec-
tion onto coordinate i (a linear map) with the real-analytic scalar function SiLU (resp. GELU). By
Proposition A.2, each component is real-analytic. Therefore, by Definition A.1, the vector-valued
maps SiLUm and GELUm are real-analytic.
Proposition F.6 (GLU-style blocks are real-analytic). Let din, dhid ∈N and consider affine maps
A1(x) = W1x + b1,
A2(x) = W2x + b2,
with W1, W2 ∈Rdhid×din and b1, b2 ∈Rdhid. Let ϕ : Rdhid →Rdhid be either SiLUdhid or
GELUdhid from Proposition F.5. Define the GLU-style block
GLUϕ(x) := A1(x) ⊙ϕ
 A2(x)

,
x ∈Rdin,
where ⊙denotes the Hadamard product.
Then GLUϕ : Rdin →Rdhid is real-analytic. In particular:
• Taking ϕ = SiLUdhid recovers SwiGLU, which is real-analytic.
• Taking ϕ = GELUdhid recovers GeGLU, which is real-analytic.
57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Proof. Each affine map Aj is real-analytic as a matrix product plus addition (Proposition A.10,
Proposition A.1). By Proposition F.5, ϕ is real-analytic, so x 7→ϕ(A2(x)) is a composition of
real-analytic maps (Proposition A.2), hence real-analytic. The map x 7→A1(x) ⊙ϕ(A2(x)) is
a Hadamard product of two real-analytic vector-valued functions; componentwise this is just the
product of real-analytic scalars, so it is real-analytic by Proposition A.1 (equivalently, by Proposi-
tion A.11). Thus GLUϕ is real-analytic. The SwiGLU and GeGLU cases follow by choosing ϕ
accordingly.
Relation to universal-approximation and expressivity results.
The material above concerns
only the analyticity of the non-linearities used in our analysis. For completeness, we also record
here how our injectivity theorem fits alongside existing expressivity results for Transformers; this
discussion is logically independent of the real-analyticity assumptions.
Classical expressivity results for Transformers are primarily existential. Universal-approximation
theorems (e.g. Yun et al. (2020); Sun & Yang (2020)) show that for any continuous sequence-to-
sequence function f on a compact domain and any ε > 0, there exists a Transformer with suitable
depth and width whose outputs are within ε of those of f. Turing-completeness results for en-
coder–decoder Transformers (e.g. P´erez et al., 2019) similarly establish the existence of parameter
settings that simulate any Turing machine. Taken together, these works characterise what the archi-
tecture can represent in principle: they do not model random initialization or gradient-based train-
ing, and they are not formulated in our discrete setting with finite context length, fixed decoder-only
architecture, and real-analytic activations.
Our results are complementary and instead concern what happens typically under standard training.
We fix a concrete decoder-only architecture and a finite prompt set, and study the map from prompts
to last-token representations. In this setting we prove that (i) for any fixed architecture, the set of
parameters for which this map is non-injective has Lebesgue measure zero, and (ii) gradient-based
training from standard random initializations preserves absolute continuity of the parameter distri-
bution and therefore almost surely avoids this “collision set”. Non-injective Transformers certainly
exist (we explicitly construct such failure cases in Section 2), but our results show that they form a
thin subset that typical optimization trajectories do not reach.
Our contribution is thus orthogonal to prior expressivity theory. We do not claim that Transformers
can only represent injective functions. Rather, within the specific regime we study (decoder-only,
real-analytic activations, cross-entropy loss, GD-type training from standard initialization), we show
that the resulting last-token map is injective with probability one over initialization and training. In
short, classical expressivity results describe what is mathematically possible for the Transformer
function class, while our analysis characterizes what is almost surely implemented when that class
is explored via standard training procedures.
58
